pg. 1 
 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK 
 
ARBA No.4 of 2021  
 
 
(From the Judgment dated 09.04.2021 passed by the learned 
District Judge, Angul in ARBP No.08 of 2017 arising out of 
arbitration award dated 21.2.2017 passed by the Learned  
Arbitral Tribunal) 
 
Jindal India Thermal Power Ltd. ….       Appellant 
-versus- 
Quartz Infra and Engineering Pvt. 
Ltd., Bhanjara Hills, Hyderabad  
…. Respondent 
 
 
 
 
    Advocates appeared in the case: 
For Appellant  : Mr. S. Mukhopadhyaya, Sr. Adv.  
Mr. S. P. Mishra, Sr. Adv. 
Mr. P. Meheta, Adv. 
Mr. Satyajit Mohanty, Adv.  
 
-versus- 
For Respondent  : Mr. V. Subba Raju,  
In person                   
      
 
 
      CORAM: 
      DR.  JUSTICE S.K. PANIGRAHI 
                             
 
 
DATE OF HEARING:-21.04.2023 
DATE OF JUDGMENT:-03.07.2023 
 
                       Dr. S.K. Panigrahi, J. 
1. This Appeal under Section 37 of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as “A  & C Act”) ha s been filed 
seeking setting aside of the judgment and final order dated

pg. 2 
 
09.04.2021 passed by the learned District Judge, Angul in 
Arbitration Petition No. 8 of 2017 arising out of arbitration award 
dated 21.2.2017 passed by the Learned Arbitral Tribunal 
comprising Justice S.B. Sinha (Retd.), Former Judge, Supreme 
Court of India, Justice R.C. Chopra (Retd.), Former Judge, Delhi 
High Court and Shri P.S. Rao.  
I. FACTUAL MATRIX OF THE CASE: 
2. The present Appellant is a Public Limited Company engaged 
inter alia in the business of production of electricity for which it  
undertook construction of a 2 x 600 MW Thermal Power Plant at 
Derang, Angul in Odisha. Having come in touch with the present 
Respondent Company during their stint as a sub-contractor for 
one M/s G.S.R. Ventures Pvt. Ltd., the Appellant Company 
herein, entered into multiple direct contracts with the Respondent 
Company. The present lis revolves around five such contracts.  
3. The basic details of the five contracts involved in the present 
appeal are as follows:  
i. Raw Water Reservoir Extension – Work Order No. 
JITPL/2011-12/Odisha/300 – Valued at Rs.10,49,72,288/- 
Dated: 14.12.2011 and Date of completion stipulated to 
be: 28.2.2012 
ii. Ash Dyke – Work Order No. JITPL/2011-12/Odisha/311 
– Valued at Rs.21,49,92,525/- Dated: 2.2.2012 and Date 
of completion stipulated to be: 2.10.2012

pg. 3 
 
 
iii. Peripheral Roads – Work Order No. JITPL/2011-
12/Odisha/246 – Valued at Rs.7,95,00,000/- Dated: 
11.4.2011 and Date of completion stipulated to be: 
11.7.2011 
iv. Internal Roads and Drains – Work Order No. 
JITPL/2011-12/Odisha/315 – Valued at Rs.16,49,00,000/- 
Dated: 29.2.2012 and Date of completion stipulated to 
be: 28.2.2013 
v. Boundary Wall – Work Order No. JITPL/2011-
12/Odisha/310 – Valued at Rs.1,59,69,075/- Dated: 
14.12.2011 and Date of completion stipulated to be: 
None mentioned. 
4. Disputes arose between the parties when the present Appellant 
terminated the aforementioned contracts on 2.2.2013 /6.2.2013  
and further encashed the Bank Guarantees furnished by the 
Respondent Company between December, 2012 and January, 
2013. The Respondent Company contended that the delay in 
performance was triggered due to hindrances and obstructions 
for which the Appellant was responsible, and therefore invoked 
arbitration. The Ld. Arbitral Tribunal comprising Justice S.B. 
Sinha (Retd.), Former Judge, Supreme Court of India, Justice R.C. 
Chopra (Retd.), Former Judge, Delhi High Court and Shri P.S. 
Rao accordingly entered into the reference. After hearing both 
sides and perusing the records during the course of 55 sittings,

pg. 4 
 
the Arbitral Award dated 21.1.2017 was passed by Justice S.B. 
Sinha (Retd.) and Shri P.S. Rao whereas Justice R.C. Chopra 
(Retd.) passed a dissenting opinion on the same day. The Ld. 
Tribunal in its majority award has awarded Rs. 9,71,06,938/- in 
favour of the present Respondent  including pendente lite interest 
on the awarded amount at the rate of 12% per annum. It has been 
further directed that if the payment is not made within one 
month from the date of the award, the present Appellant would 
be liable to pay interest at the rate of 18% per annum till the date 
of actual payment.  
5. Aggrieved by the arbitral award, the present Appellant 
challenged the Award dated 21.2.2017 before the Ld. District 
Judge, Angul on various grounds in a petition under Section 34 of 
the A&C Act. Having heard the parties, the Ld. District Judge has 
been pleased to dismiss the petition vide its order dated 9.4.2021 
in ARBP No.8 of 2017.  
6. Being thus aggrieved, the present Appellants have approached 
this Court in ARBA No.4 of 2021, challenging the judgment and 
order dated 09.04.2021 of the learned District Judge passed in 
ARBP No.8 of 2017.  
7. It is also pertinent to mention here that this Court had referred 
the parties to mediation, during the course of the proceedings, 
having conceived the opinion that the parties should explore the

pg. 5 
 
 
possibility of an amicable settlement vide its order dated 
25.1.2023. However, the parties failed to arrive at a settlement.  
8. Now that the background leading up to the instant Appeal have 
been laid down, this Court shall endeavour to summarise the 
contentions of the Parties and the broad grounds that have been 
raised to invoke this Court’s limited jurisdiction available under 
Section 37 of the A&C Act.  
II. APPELLANT’S SUBMISSIONS 
9. Shri Ciccu Mukhopadhyaya, learned Senior Counsel for the 
Appellants assails the arbitral award and the judgment of the Ld. 
District Judge mainly on the ground that there has been a breach 
of the principles of natural justice. It has vehemently been 
contended that the refusal of the Ld. Tribunal to entertain the 
application filed under Section 27 of the A&C Act (to call upon 
additional witnesses) was a breach of the principles of natural 
justice. The same is contended to have seriously aggrieved the 
present Appellant, who submits that such denial resultantly 
disallowed them from bringing some relevant material evidence 
on record. Furthermore, it is also claimed that the Arbitral Award 
relies on a large number of judgments which neither party had 
cited, thereby denying the parties an opportunity to address their 
arguments on the same. 
10. It is also contended that the Ld. Tribunal has traversed beyond 
the contours of the contract and the terms contained therein to

pg. 6 
 
arrive at its findings. This is contended especially with regard to 
the Appellant’s alleged unfettered right to terminate the contract 
and the grant of loss of profit to the Respondent Company.  
11.  Moreover, it is submitted that the learned District Court has 
hastily ignored the contentions of the Appellant and did not 
assign any independent reason as to how or why the findings of 
the Ld. Tribunal were correct.  
12. Lastly, it is vehemently submitted that the Ld. Tribunal has 
violated Section 18 of the Act as it has allegedly failed to treat the 
parties equally and therefore, on this ground as well the present 
Arbitral Award is liable to be set aside.  
III. RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS 
13. Per contra , learned counsel for the Respondent states that the 
Appellants have not been able to demonstrate any reasonable 
ground for interfering with the impugned judgment apart from 
making bald statements towards the same. It was vehemently 
argued that the scope of interference of this Court in an 
application under Section 37 of the A&C Act is extremely limited 
and this Court cannot reappreciate evidence at this stage, 
therefore his Court may not revisit the factual findings of the Ld. 
Tribunal apart from testing the same on the mantle of 
reasonableness. It was also submitted that the Learned District 
Judge had considered all the material aspects of the contentions 
raised by the parties and also duly regarded their submissions

pg. 7 
 
 
thereby warranting no interference with the concurrent views of 
the Learned Arbitral Tribunal as well as the Learned District 
Judge.   
14. It was also strenuously argued that the Learned Arbitral Tribunal 
has, in fact, zealously scrutinized all the claims and counter 
claims to ultimately awarded the present Respondent only 
Rs.9.71 crores as compared to the total claim of Rs.30.6 crores. It is 
further alleged that the present Appellants have not been 
diligently conducting the matter and have employed delay tactics 
to further inconvenience and perpetuate hardships to the 
Respondent Company. 
 
 
IV. ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION: 
15. Having heard the parties and perused the materials available on 
record, this court has identified the following issues to be 
determined:  
A. What is the scope o f this Court’s power under Section 37 of the 
A&C Act and whether the arbitral award is patently illegal as 
alleged by the Appellant?  
B. Whether the Learned Arbitral Tribunal has contravened the 
principles of natural justice and violated Section 18 of the A&C 
Act by rejecting the application under Section 27 of the A&C Act, 
preferred by the Appellant?

pg. 8 
 
C. Whether the District Court has merely parroted the Learned 
Tribunal’s findings without applying its own judicial mind to the 
contentions and submissions of the parties?  
ISSUE A: WHAT IS THE SCOPE OF THIS COURT’S POWER 
UNDER SECTION 37 OF THE A&C ACT AND WHETHER 
THE ARBITRAL AWARD IS PATENTLY ILLEGAL AS 
ALLEGED BY THE APPELLANTS? 
16. The Appellant has approached this Court challenging the Ld. 
District Court’s order dated 9.4.2021 wherein the Appellant’s 
challenge to the award dated 21.2.2017 has been dismissed. The 
law regarding a challenge to an arbitral award under the A&C 
Act is no more a res integra.  
17. The intention of the legislature while enacting the A&C Act was 
mainly the prompt and efficacious disposal of matters. The A&C 
Act has been set forth with the objective to curtail the interference 
of the courts into the arbitral proceedings. In order to further 
advance this objective while granting an opportunity to maintain 
a check on it, a provision to set aside the award has been 
included. But even then, it was provided that an award may only 
be set aside as it fulfills certain criteria which would qualify to be 
bad in law. 
18. It is incontrovertible that the Learned Arbitrator or Arbitral 
Tribunal is to pass an award, upon conducting the arbitration 
proceedings with the participation of parties to the dispute, and 
considering the Statement of Claim and Statement of Defence

pg. 9 
 
 
presented by and on behalf of the parties, keeping in mind the 
relevant documents placed on record by the parties. The Learned 
Arbitrator or Arbitral Tribunal is for all intents and purposes 
considered a Court faced with the task of adjudicating the 
dispute before him. An unfettered scope of intervention in their 
functioning would defeat the spirit and purpose of the A&C Act. 
Therefore, the Supreme Court has time and again reiterated that 
the scope of intervention of the Courts is limited in the cases of a 
challenge under Section 34 or Section 37 of the A&C Act. 
19. Having regard to the contentions urged and the issues raised, it is 
apposite to take note of the principles enunciated by the Apex 
Court in some of the relevant decisions cited by the parties on the 
scope of challenge to an arbitral award under Section 34 and the 
scope of appeal under Section 37 of the Act of 1996. 
20. There is no gainsaying that the jurisdiction of this Court under 
Section 37 of the A&C Act is limited in scope. In this regard, it is 
deemed apt to advert to the decision in State of Jharkhand v. HSS 
Integrated SDN 1, wherein the Supreme Court observed as 
follows:— 
“7. As held by this Court in a catena of decisions, 
the award passed by the Arbitral Tribunal can be 
interfered with in the proceedings under Sections 34 
and 37 of the Arbitration Act only in a case where 
the finding is perverse and/or contrary to the 
                                                 
1 (2019) 9 SCC 798

pg. 10 
 
evidence and/or the same is against the public policy. 
(See Associate Builders v. DDA). 
7.1. In the present case, the categorical findings 
arrived at by the Arbitral Tribunal are to the effect 
that the termination of the contract was illegal and 
without following due procedure of the provisions of 
the contract. The findings are on appreciation of 
evidence considering the relevant provisions and 
material on record as well as on interpretation of the 
relevant provisions of the contract, which are neither 
perverse nor contrary to the evidence in record. 
Therefore, as such, the first appellate court and the 
High Court have rightly not interfered with such 
findings of fact recorded by the learned Arbitral 
Tribunal.” 
21. The scope of Section 37 of the Arbitration Act was further 
analyzed by the Supreme Court in MMTC Limited v. Vedanta 
Limited2 where it was held: 
“14. As far as interference with an order made under 
Section 34, as per Section 37, is concerned, it cannot 
be disputed that such interference under Section 37 
cannot travel beyond the restrictions laid down 
under Section 34. In other words, the court cannot 
undertake an independent assessment of the merits 
of the award, and must only ascertain that the 
exercise of power by the court under Section 34 has 
not exceeded the scope of the provision. Thus, it is 
evident that in case an arbitral award has been 
confirmed by the court under Section 34 and by the 
court in an appeal under Section 37, this Court 
must be extremely cautious and slow to disturb such 
concurrent findings.” 
                                                 
2 (2019) 4 SCC 163

pg. 11 
 
 
A similar view, as stated above, has been taken by the Supreme 
Court in K. Sugumar v. Hindustan Petroleum Corpn. Ltd.3. 
22. Recently, in Haryana Tourism Limited v. Kandhari Beverages 
Limited, the Supreme Court was in seisin of a situation wherein 
the appellant therein had accepted the tender filed by the 
respondent, however, disputes arose between the parties during 
pendency of the contract which led to appointment of an 
Arbitrator. Aggrieved by the Arbitrator's Award, the respondent 
filed objections under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act before the 
concerned ADJ, which was dismissed. The respondent preferred 
an appeal against the order of learned ADJ as well as the Award 
of the learned Arbitrator before the Punjab and Haryana High 
Court under Section 37 of the Arbitration Act, which was 
allowed. Assailing the order of the High Court, the appellant 
approached the Supreme Court. While setting aside the order of 
the High Court and restoring the Award of the Arbitrator and 
order of the learned ADJ, the Supreme Court delineated the scope 
of Section 37 of the A&C Act and observed thus: 
“8. So far as the impugned judgment and order 
passed by the High Court quashing and setting aside 
the award and the order passed by the Additional 
District Judge under Section 34 of the Arbitration 
Act are concerned, it is required to be noted that in 
an appeal under Section 37 of the Arbitration Act, 
the High Court has entered into the merits of the 
                                                 
3 (2020) 12 SCC 539

pg. 12 
 
claim, which is not permissible in exercise of powers 
under Section 37 of the Arbitration Act. 
9. As per settled position of law laid down by this 
Court in a catena of decisions, an award can be set 
aside only if the award is against the public policy of 
India. The award can be set aside under Sections 
34/37 of the Arbitration Act, if the award is found to 
be contrary to, (a) fundamental policy of Indian 
Law; or (b) the interest of India; or (c) justice or 
morality; or (d) if it is patently illegal. None of the 
aforesaid exceptions shall be applicable to the facts of 
the case on hand. The High Court has entered into 
the merits of the claim and has decided the appeal 
under Section 37 of the Arbitration Act as if the 
High Court was deciding the appeal against the 
judgment and decree passed by the learned trial 
court. Thus, the High Court has exercised the 
jurisdiction not vested in it under Section 37 of the 
Arbitration Act. The impugned judgment and order 
passed by the High Court is hence not sustainable.” 
23. The Supreme Court, has repeatedly reiterated in Mcdermott 
International Inc.  v. Burn Standard Co. Ltd. 4, NHAI v. M. 
Hakeem5 and K. Sugumar v. Hindustan Petroleum Corpn. Ltd. 6 
among others, that the A&C Act includes a provision for the 
supervisory role of courts, for the review of the arbitral award 
only to ensure fairness. 
24. From a perusal of the judicial dicta cited hereinabove, it is 
discernible that the scope of interference under Section 37 of the 
                                                 
4 (2006) 11 SCC 181 
5 (2021) 9 SCC 1  
6 (2020) 12 SCC 539

pg. 13 
 
 
A&C Act is narrow. Before interfering with an Award passed by 
the Arbitral Tribunal, which, in fact, has been concurred with by 
the First Appellate Court, this Court shall circumspect and refrain 
from reassessment or re-examination of the merits of the case, as 
if it were a Court of Appeal against the Award. In other words, 
the court cannot undertake an independent assessment of the 
merits of the award, and must only ascertain that the exercise of 
power by the court under Section 34 has not exceeded the scope 
of the provision. Thus, it is evident that in case an arbitral award 
has been confirmed by the court under Section 34 and by the 
court in an appeal under Section 37, this Court must be extremely 
cautious and slow to disturb such concurrent findings. 
25. It is similarly fairly well settled law that the jurisdiction of the 
Court under Section 34 of the A&C Act is narrow and limited. 
Reliance in this regard may be placed upon the Supreme Court ’s 
judgment in UHL Power Company Ltd. v. State of Himachal 
Pradesh7, wherein it was observed that:  
“16. As it is, the jurisdiction  conferred on courts 
under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act is fairly 
narrow, when it comes to the scope of an appeal 
under Section 37 of the Arbitration Act, the 
jurisdiction of an appellate court in examining an 
order, setting aside or refusing to set aside an award, 
is all the more circumscribed.” 
                                                 
7 (2022) 4 SCC 116

pg. 14 
 
26. An arbitral award may be set aside only if it is against the public 
policy of India, that is to say, if it is contrary to: 
(a) fundamental policy of Indian law; or 
(b) the interest of India; or 
(c) justice or morality; or 
(d) if it is patently illegal. 
27.  After the Apex Court’s judgment and findings in Oil & Natural 
Gas Corporation Ltd . v. Western Geco International Limited 8 
were subsequently discussed in Associate Builders v. Delhi 
Development Authority9 the position of law was clarified and laid 
down recently by the Supreme Court in Ssangyong Engg. & 
Construction Co. Ltd. v. NHAI 10, wherein the Apex Court was 
pleased to broadly stipulate the aforementioned four constituents 
of what makes an award against the “public policy of India”. 
28. This Court has to see whether the conclusion so arrived suffers 
from any patent illegality while making sure not to transgress the 
‘lakshman rekha’ of the scope of this Court’s powers under 
Section 37 of the A&C Act.  
                                                 
8 (2014) 9 SCC 263 
9 (2015) 3 SCC 49  
10 (2019) 15 SCC 131

pg. 15 
 
 
29. The Supreme Court in State of Chattisgarh v. Sal 
Udyog11 reiterated its earlier observations in Delhi Airport Metro 
Express (P) Ltd. v. DMRC12  while referring to the facets of patent 
illegality, held as under: 
“29. Patent illegality should be illegality which goes 
to the root of the matter. In other words, every error 
of law committed by the Arbitral Tribunal would 
not fall within the expression “patent illegality”. 
Likewise, erroneous application of law cannot be 
categorised as patent illegality. In addition, 
contravention of law not linked to public policy or 
public interest is beyond the scope of the expression 
“patent illegality”. What is prohibited is for courts 
to reappreciate evidence to conclude that the award 
suffers from patent illegality appearing on the face of 
the award, as Courts do not sit in appeal against the 
arbitral award. The permissible grounds for 
interference with a domestic award under Section 
34(2-A) on the ground of patent illegality is when 
the arbitrator takes a view which is not even a 
possible one, or interprets a clause in the contract in 
such a manner which no fair-minded or reasonable 
person would, or if the arbitrator commits an error 
of jurisdiction by wandering outside the contract 
and dealing with matters not allotted to them. An 
arbitral award stating no reasons for its findings 
would make itself susceptible to challenge on this 
account. The conclusions of the arbitrator which are 
based on no evidence or have been arrived at by 
ignoring vital evidence are perverse and can be set 
aside on the ground of patent illegality. Also, 
                                                 
11 (2022) 2 SCC 275 
12 (2022) 1 SCC 131

pg. 16 
 
consideration of documents which are not supplied 
to the other party is a facet of perversity falling 
within the expression “patent illegality.” 
An award might be set aside stating it to be patently illegal, 
provided the illegality goes to the root of the award. If the 
illegality is of a trivial nature, it cannot be said that the award is 
against public policy. This proposition was reaffirmed by the 
Supreme Court in Hindustan Zinc Ltd. v. Friends Coal 
Carbonization13. 
30.  This Court had the opportunity to peruse the Arbitral Award 
and the Learned District Judge’s judgment and order. There is an 
area of serious concern pertaining to the disconcerting propensity 
of the Courts tasked with hearing challenges to the arbitral 
award, embarking on a journey of dissecting and re-assessing 
factual aspects. Keeping in mind the limited scope of this Court’s 
interference as well as this Court’s inability to enter  into the 
merits of the matter, the principal contentions put forth by the 
parties are examined on the touchstone of the grounds 
envisioned in the A&C Act and have been dealt with in the 
following manner:  
i. With respect to the impugned award being contrary to 
the terms of the contract:  
a. The Appellant very ardently contended that it had an 
absolute right of termination without cause and 
                                                 
13 (2006) 4 SCC 445

pg. 17 
 
 
therefore there could be no question of wrongful 
termination by the Appellant. It is their further 
submission that the Ld. Tribunal had not considered this 
particular contention and if the same had been 
considered, it would have led to a different result than 
what the Arbitral Tribunal arrived at. In the present 
case, it was submitted by the Appellant that the express 
terms of the contract entitled the Appellant to terminate 
the contracts without cause and at will. As such if the 
provision was not ignored, the Tribunal was bound to 
uphold the right of termination and hence bound to 
reject any claims for wrongful termination or damages 
for wrongful termination i.e. loss of profit. 
b. An arbitral tribunal must decide in accordance with the 
terms of the contract but if an arbitrator construes a term 
of the contract in a reasonable manner, it would not 
mean that the award can be set aside on this ground. 
Construction of the terms of the contract is primarily for 
an arbitrator to decide unless the arbitrator construes the 
contract in such a way that it could be said to be 
something that no fair minded or reasonable person 
would do. Of course, the arbitrator cannot wander 
outside the contract and deals with the matters not 
forming the subject matter or allotted to him as in that

pg. 18 
 
case he would commit jurisdictional error. Where a 
cause or matters in differences are referred to an 
arbitrator, whether lawyer or layman, he is constituted 
as the sole and final judge of all questions of law and of 
fact obviously with limited grounds of interference.  
c. In Paragraph 243 of the Arbitral Award, the Ld. 
Tribunal has opined:  
“In the opinion of the Tribunal, only because in 
terms of the work order the Employer has a 
right to reduce the quantity of the work, if any 
contingency arises therefore, the same would 
not mean that the contract can be terminated 
by it at its sweet will.” 
d. The Ld. Tribunal has further dealt with the question of 
how the contract should be construed, whether the 
contract envisions mutual obligation and if it does then 
whether the present Appellant fulfills their obligations 
satisfactorily in order to enable the Respondent to 
perform their part of the contract, and finally as to 
whether the termination of the contract was valid. After 
perusing the same wherein the Learned Tribunal has 
considered the conduct of the Parties as well as the 
material evidence on record when this Court embarks 
on a reading of the terms of the multiple contracts 
entered into between the parties, this Court is in favour 
of the opinion of the Learned Tribunal.

pg. 19 
 
 
e. Every Clause containing the so called unfettered right to 
terminate is immediately succeeded with the Clause 
which essentially states that if the said work performed 
by the present Re spondent is not up to the “entire 
satisfaction” of the Appellant, the Appellant Company 
has a right to terminate the assignment. The burden to 
explain why or how the Appellant was not entirely 
satisfied in order to justify the termination is sine qua 
non.  
f. A clause granting unfettered right to terminate in favour 
of one party, especially if the said party is the one 
possessing higher bargaining strength, is 
unconscionable. A contract is meant to be respected and 
adhered to by both parties. The parties will perform 
their respective duties and obligations in line with the 
terms of the contract for the consideration set out 
therein. Upholding the applicability of such a right 
would inadvertently lead to anomalous situations. 
When the contracts themselves include two rights of 
termination, one being absolute, and one wherein the 
Appellant must justify its non-satisfaction and prescribe 
reasons, it would be against the conscience of this Court 
to hold that the Appellant’s right to terminate was 
absolute. Especially as the Appellant itself has provided

pg. 20 
 
otherwise. An unfettered right to terminate a contract 
must be unqualified with the basic requirement of the 
party responsible for effecting such termination having 
acted in good faith. This conclusion of the Ld. Tribunal 
that the Appellant did not have an unfettered or 
absolute right of termination therefore cannot be said to 
be patently illegal or unreasonable.  
ii. With respect to time being of essence in the contracts:  
a. On the issue of time being the essence or not the 
Learned Tribunal referred to a large number of 
judgments nearly all of which had never been cited by 
the Respondent herein to hold that time was not of the 
essence in the present case as alleged by the Respondent. 
It is has been contended that the Learned Tribunal has 
completely failed to consider the argument of the 
Appellant herein that - even if the time was not of the 
essence, it could have been made of the essence by 
notifying the required completion date failing which the 
contract could be terminated.  
b. The judgments referred to by the Learned Arbitral 
Tribunal do not, as a matter of practice, have to be 
disclosed to the parties. No court in its judgment or 
order provides the parties a complete list of authorities it

pg. 21 
 
 
seeks to rely on in order to invite the parties 
agreement/disagreement with the same. This Court as 
well at the time of drawing up this judgment has 
undertaken research to understand the current position 
of law in order to substantiate its conclusion. The 
Learned Tribunal has similarly done the same. This 
Court is in no position to rebuke the Ld. Tribunal for its 
reference to a particular judgment or authority as that 
reference is the foundation of its reasoning to arrive at 
its findings. We are concerned only with the 
reasonableness, legality and adequacy of the said 
finding itself.  Therefore, the contention of the Appellant 
that the Learned Tribunal has committed patent 
illegality by referring to judgments and authorities that 
were not cited is unsustainable and is inherently flawed.  
c. Furthermore, it is pertinent to note herein that the five 
contracts that form the basis of the present lis do not 
contain any express provision stating that time is of the 
essence. There, however, is a provision that extensions 
may be granted subject to liquidated damages being 
imposed. In light of the same, the Ld. Tribunal’s 
conclusion that time was not of essence of the contracts 
cannot be said to be patently illegal.

pg. 22 
 
iii. Other factual disputes raised by parties 
With respect to issues pertaining to quantum of claims, 
payment delays, electricity charges, price escalations, 
work hindered on account of rainy season, hindrances at 
site, amounts retained, etc. are factual disputes. 
a. This Court is cognizant of the scope of its powers (and 
limitations) under Section 37 of the A&C Act. This Court 
has to make a conscious effort to not under any 
circumstances, enter into the realm of facts or factual 
findings. The evidence that was produced by the parties 
has been thoroughly examined by the Learned Tribunal 
which is to the satisfaction of this Court. By making 
submissions pertaining to such facts, the Appellant is 
attempting to draw this Court into an exercise of re-
appreciation of evidence while also seeking to re-agitate 
its contentions. The same is impermissible in law and 
therefore, these contentions need not be gone into. 
However, it is indicated that the Learned Arbitral 
Tribunal being the best judge of the facts and therefore 
having recorded its factual findings is irrefragable in the 
present matter.   
iv. Violation of principles of Natural Justice 
With respect to allegations pertaining to violation of 
principles of natural justice in so far as the Appellant

pg. 23 
 
 
was not allowed to lead relevant evidence thereby 
causing grave prejudice to the Appellant; the non-
consideration of the Appellant’s arguments thereby 
allegedly violating Section 18 of the A&C Act and the 
reliance of the Ld. Tribunal on judgments. This 
contention will be discussed as a separate issue 
subsequently given its importance.  
31. It is generally recognized that when the Arbitral Tribunal has 
thoroughly evaluated the materials and evidence presented to 
them, the court, when considering objections under Section 34 of 
the A&C Act, does not act as a court of appeal and is not required 
to reexamine all of the evidence or the parties' case on merits. An 
award made by an Arbitral Tribunal cannot be revoked on the 
ground that another viewpoint is conceivable in the court's eyes. 
In these cases, the court's responsibility is to determine whether 
the Arbitral Tribunal's point of view on the relevant facts, 
pleadings, and evidence is a reasonable one. The court should be 
reluctant to intervene even if, after considering the objections 
under Section 34, it were determined that there were two possible 
assessments of the material and that the Arbitral Tribunal had 
taken one route instead of the other. If the Arbitral Tribunal's 
viewpoint is reasonable, the court is not permitted to substitute 
its own opinion for that of the Learned Arbitrator. The same has 
been previously reiterated by this Court in State of Orissa v.

pg. 24 
 
Bhagyadhar Dash14 and more recently in judgment dated 9.1.2023 
in ARBA No. 39 of 2018 titled as United India Insurance 
Company Ltd., Bhubaneswar v. Suryo Udyog Ltd. 
32. This Court notes that the arbitration between the parties 
pertained to five different contracts. The Learned Tribunal 
accordingly dealt with the claims raised in each contract 
separately. The meticulousness showcased by the Learned 
Tribunal in assessing each claim is, in fact, laudable.  
33. This Court doesn’t find the findings of the Learned Tribunal to be 
unreasonable. The Learned Tribunal in their award, has 
appreciated all relevant evidence, examined witness statements, 
and simultaneously evaluated the tenacity of the claims of the 
parties  in light of the terms of contract, to arrive at a reasoned 
conclusion.  
34. The Arbitrator is a Judge chosen by the parties and his decision is 
final. It is well-settled that the Court is precluded from re-
appreciating the evidence. Even in a case where the award 
contains reasons, the interference therewith would still be not 
available within the jurisdiction of the Court unless, of course, the 
reasons are totally perverse or the judgment is based on a wrong 
proposition of law or the arbitrator exceeds the terms of the 
agreement or passes an award in absence of any evidence. An 
                                                 
14 2016 SCC OnLine Ori 1039

pg. 25 
 
 
error apparent on the face of records would not imply closer 
scrutiny of the merits of documents and materials on record. 
Once it is found that the view of the arbitrator is plausible one, 
the Court will refrain itself from interfering. The said proposition 
is laid down by the Supreme Court in State of U.P.  v. Allied 
Constructions15 and followed in subsequent decisions. 
35. The scope of interference of this Court being very limited, this 
Court would not be justified in reappraising the material on 
record and substituting its own views in place of the arbitrator's 
view. Where there is an error apparent on the face of the record 
or if the arbitrator has not followed the statutory position, then 
and then only would it be justified for this Court to interfere with 
the award published by the arbitrator. Once the arbitrator has 
applied his mind to the matter before him, this Court is not 
permitted to reappraise the matter as if it were an appeal and 
even if two views are possible, the view taken by the arbitrator 
would prevail. 
36. The Supreme Court in P.R. Shah Shares & Stock Broker (P) 
Ltd. v. B.H.H. Securities (P) Ltd .16 has held that a Court does not 
sit in appeal over the award of an Arbitrator by re-assessing or re-
appreciating the evidence. An award can be challenged only on 
the grounds mentioned in Section 34(2) of the Act and in absence 
                                                 
15 (2003) 7 SCC 396 
16 (2012) 1 SCC 594

pg. 26 
 
of any such ground, it is not possible to re-examine the facts to 
find out whether a different decision can be arrived at. This view 
was reiterated by the Apex Court in Swan Gold Mining Ltd. v. 
Hindustan Copper Ltd.17. In light of the aforesaid facts, this Court 
does not doubt that there is no patent illegality in the present case 
much less, any apparent violation of any terms of public policy.   
 
ISSUE B: WHETHER THE WHETHER THE LD. ARBITRAL 
TRIBUNAL HAS CONTRAVENED THE PRINCIPLES OF 
NATURAL JUSTICE AND VIOLATED SECTION 18 OF THE 
A&C ACT BY REJECTING THE APPLICATION UNDER 
SECTION 27 OF THE A&C ACT, PREFERRED BY THE 
APPELLANT?  
37. “They constitute the basic elements of a fair hearing, having their roots  
in the innate sense of man for fair play and justice which is not the 
preserve of any particular race or country but is shared in common by 
all men” - (The Apex Court held in Union of India v. Tulsiram 
Patel18 whilst discussing the principles of natural justice). 
38.  The Supreme Court in Canara Bank v. Debasis Das19 held that:  
“Natural Justice is another name of common -sense 
justice. Rules of Natural Justice are not codified 
canons. But they are principles ingrained into the 
conscience of man. Natural justice is the 
administration of justice in a common-sense liberal 
way. Justice is based substantially on natural ideals 
and human values. The administration of justice is 
                                                 
17 (2015) 5 SCC 739 
18 (1985) 3 SCC 398 
19 (2003) 4 SCC 557

pg. 27 
 
 
to be freed from the narrow and restricted 
considerations which are usually associated with a 
formulated law in Volving linguistic technicalities 
and grammatical niceties. It is the substance of 
justice which has to determine its form.” 
39. As a part of the rule of Natural Justice, the right of audi alteram 
partem is a valuable right which mandates that no one should be 
condemned unheard. A corollary has been deduced from the 
above rule, namely “quialiquid statuerit parte inaudita altera, aequum 
licet dixerit, baud aequum fecerit ” that is, “h e who shall decide 
anything without the other side having seen heard, although he 
may have said what is right, will not have been what is right” or 
another manner in which it is now expressed, “justice should not 
only be done but should manifestly be seen to be done”. 
40.  The Appellant has submitted that the Arbitral Award is vitiated 
on account of violation of basic and fundamental principles of 
natural justice as the Appellant herein was not allowed to lead 
evidence on material facts in issue in the arbitration by rejection 
of the Section 27 Application filed by the Appellant before the 
Tribunal by a Majority Decision, with the Minority Dissenting. 
The Appellant therefore contends that the parties were not 
treated equally and hence Section 18 of the A&C Act also stood 
violated. Campbell J. of the Ontario Superior Court of Justice in 
Mungo v. Saverino20  very beautifully summarised:  
                                                 
20 [1995] O.J. No. 3021

pg. 28 
 
“The great merit of arbitration is that they should 
be, compared to courts, comparatively quick, cheap 
and final. There is a trade-off between perfection on 
the one hand and speed, economy and finality on the 
other hand. If you go to arbitration, you can get 
quick and final justice and you can get on with the 
rest of your life. If you go to court, you can get 
exquisitely slow and expensive justice and you can 
spend the rest of your life enduring it and paying for 
it. 
For a disappointed arbitral litigant, jurisdiction and 
natural justice are good pickings. Jurisdiction and 
natural justice invoke the primordial instinct of 
courts to second-guess other tribunals and thus 
defeat the greatest benefit of arbitration, its finality.  
It is, therefore, important for the court to resist its 
natural tendency, faced with a clear and attractive 
argument on jurisdiction and natural justice, to 
plunge into the details of the arbitration and second-
guess the arbitrator not only on the result but also 
on the punctilio of the arbitration. If an arbitration 
is basically fair, courts should resist the temptation 
to plunge into detailed complaints about flaws in the 
arbitration process”. 
41. To set aside an arbitral award on the ground of violation of 
principles of natural justice, the court has to be satisfied, first, that 
the arbitral tribunal breached a rule of natural justice in making 
the arbitral award. Second, and more importantly, the court must 
then be satisfied that the breach of natural justice caused actual or 
real prejudice to the party challenging the award. In other words, 
the breach of the rules of natural justice must have actually 
altered the outcome of the arbitral proceedings in some

pg. 29 
 
 
meaningful way before curial intervention is warranted. Where 
the same result could or would ultimately have ensued even if 
the arbitrator had acted properly, there would be no basis for 
setting aside the arbitral award in question.  
42.  A party contending to use the principles of natural justice has to 
satisfy the Court that not only has it been denied the right of 
hearing or a notice, but also that the denial in fact has resulted in 
“real prejudice” to it by frustrating its lawful rights. The 
principles of natural justice are required to be complied with 
having regard to the ‘fact-situation’ of ‘case to case’ without there 
being any straitjacket formula with the thrust to find out 
prejudice caused to the complainant as opined by the Supreme 
Court in State Bank of Patiala v. S.K. Sharma 21.The principles of 
natural justice having been followed in a particular case are not 
‘immutable’ but ‘flexible’. 
43. The Learned Arbitral Tribunal in its order dealing with the 
Section 27 Application preferred by the Appellant for summoning 
of eight additional witnesses has opined as follows:  
“… there cannot be any doubt or dispute that 
approval to be granted by the Arbitral Tribunal for 
the purpose of obtaining assistance of the Court in 
taking evidence is discretionary in nature.  
With a view to exercise such discretion, the Tribunal 
is not only required to take into consideration the 
question as to whether the purpose for which the 
                                                 
21 (1996) 3 SCC 364

pg. 30 
 
witnesses have been summoned is genuine and the 
same shall be useful to the Tribunal in determining 
the real dispute between the parties.  
… The arbitral proceedings had commenced on 2 
July 2013.  
… The Respondent at all material times was and 
still is aware of the nature and extent of dispute 
between the parties.  
The Respondent intended to examine five witnesses 
as would appear from the list of witnesses submitted 
by it on 28 February 2015.  
… It is also not the case of the Respondent that the 
concerned witnesses have declined to depose in its 
favour unless summoned by the Tribunal or a 
competent court of law.  
… The witness sought to be summoned admittedly 
did not sign the level books and thus he would not be 
able to prove or disprove the contents thereof.  
So far as the second reason for summoning the said 
witness is concerned, the fact that he shall be able to 
prove the details of the progress achieved after 
handing over of the site by the Claimant is not a 
relevant issue, being not a matter of dispute between 
the parties hereto, more so, having not been pleaded.  
(Pertaining to the First Witness sought to be 
summoned) 
… The parties have brought on record materials 
which were supposed to be within their power and 
possession, but if they did not, they would suffer the 
legal consequences therefore.  
… The Responde nt, therefore at all material times, 
could have produced him as a witness. … 
(Pertaining to the Second Witness sought to be 
summoned)

pg. 31 
 
 
… Moreover, if the Claimant has not been able to 
prove the quality of supplies of the materials brought 
on site, it may suffer consequences therefore. 
(Pertaining to the Third Category of Witnesses who 
were suppliers/sub-contractors and sought to be 
summoned)” 
44. The Arbitral Tribunal, therefore, was amply satisfied about the 
sufficiency of the evidence presented before it and in fact was of 
the opinion that prejudice would be caused to the present 
Respondent(Claimant therein) if the application under section 27 
were to be allowed. Moreover, a glance at the aforementioned 
extracts would show that the Ld. Tribunal was of the opinion that 
both the parties would have to bear the consequences for not 
having filed or gotten on record evidence to support their 
contentions. No discrimination was made and therefore it is 
rather evident that the parties were treated equally. Dealing with 
such matters in Associate Builders v. Delhi Development 
Authority22, the Apex Court has held that Arbitral Tribunal is the 
master of both quality and quantity of evidence to reach a finding 
of fact.  
45. Furthermore, as the Supreme Court has observed in the case of 
Union of India v. T.R. Varma 23, that the principles of natural 
justice require that the parties should have the opportunity of 
placing all relevant evidence on which they rely. However, in the 
                                                 
22 (2015) 3 SCC 49 
23 [1957] 13 F.J.R. 237

pg. 32 
 
present matter, it does not appear that the evidence of these 
witnesses were at all relevant to the enquiry and therefore in not 
examining these witnesses there has been no violation of the 
principles of natural justice, and no denial of reasonable 
opportunity. 
46. This Court also notes that the A&C Act does not provide for a 
dissenting award. It only prescribes the form of an award. The 
“Operative Part of The Award”, signed by all three members of 
the Arbitral Tribunal, which states that “The decision of the Arbitral 
Tribunal by the Majority of the Members shall be treated to be the 
Award of the Tribunal in terms of Section 29(1) of the Arbitr ation and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 ” shows that the majority award fulfills the 
requirements of a valid Arbitral Award as envisioned in the A&C 
Act. The dissenting award referred to by the Appellant or the 
dissenting procedural orders are at the end of the day merely 
dissenting opinions and can only be used to buttress the 
submissions, but not to conclusively justify any findings. The 
parties are bound by the findings that the majority award arrives 
at and this Court in an appeal against the arbitral award only has 
to consider those findings and their reasonableness. As this court 
is aware, there may be multiple ways of looking at a fact 
situation, but this Court need only examine whether the majority 
award’s appreciation of facts/ law was reasonable, fair and 
justifiable based on cogent reasoning.

pg. 33 
 
 
ISSUE C: WHETHER THE LD. DISTRICT COURT HAS 
PARROTED THE LD. TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS WITHOUT 
APPLYING ITS OWN JUDICIAL MIND TO THE 
CONTENTIONS AND SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES?  
47.  The judicial approach is one of the tests required to be applied to 
find out if the award is arbitrary, extraneous or whimsical. The 
judicial approach is a specie of the larger genus of “Fundamental 
Policy of Indian Law”. The decision making authority is required 
to act bona fide and deal with the subject in a fair, reasonable and 
objective manner and its decision should not be actuated by any 
extraneous consideration. 
48. It is clear that the juristic principle of a “judicial approach” 
demands that a decision be fair, reasonable and objective. On the 
obverse side, anything arbitrary and whimsical would obviously 
not be a determination which would either be fair, reasonable or 
objective. 
49. An award can be said to be against justice or morality only when 
it shocks the conscience of the Court. The award cannot be passed 
on the mere ipse dixit  of the arbitrator. Mere reference to 
documents, deposition, pleadings without discussing the 
relevancy and cogency of such materials and evidence would 
make the award an unreasoned award. Since an award is subject 
to judicial review, it is important that such award must disclose 
the mind of the arbitrator. Therefore, as discussed above, if the 
interpretation of the contract rendered by the learned arbitrator is

pg. 34 
 
a possible interpretation the same cannot be interfered with by 
this Court under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act. The Court also 
cannot re-appreciate the evidence considered by the learned 
arbitrator under Section 34 of the A&C Act, let alone under 
Section 37 of the A&C Act . 
50. It is trite law that the scope of examination under Section 34 of 
the A&C Act does not entail re-adjudication of the disputes. 
Unless an arbitral award falls foul of the public policy of India or 
is vitiated by patent illegality, no interference in the award is 
warranted. In the present case, the Ld. District Judge did not 
accept that any of the grounds as set out in Section 34 of the A&C 
Act are established. 
51.  In Indu Engineering & Textiles Ltd. v. Delhi Development 
Authority24 , the Supreme Court held that the Arbitrator being a 
Judge appointed by the parties, the award passed by him is not to 
be interfered with lightly. When the view taken by the arbitrator 
was a possible or a plausible one, on his analysis of evidence and 
interpretation of contractual and/or statutory provisions and did 
not suffer from any manifest error, it was not open to the Court to 
interfere with the award. Even though the judgment in Indu 
Engineering & Textiles Ltd. (supra) was rendered in the context 
of an application under Section 30 of the Arbitration Act 1940, for 
setting aside of an award, the same principle would squarely 
                                                 
24 (2001) 5 SCC 691

pg. 35 
 
 
apply to an application for setting aside an award, under Section 
34 of the 1996 A&C Act as well. 
52. In ONGC Ltd. v. Western Geco International Ltd. 25, the Apex 
Court added distinct and fundamental juristic principles which 
must be understood as a part and parcel of the fundamental 
policy of Indian law. The Supreme Court held:  
“35. What then would constitute the ‘fundamental 
policy of Indian law’ is the question. The decision 
in ONGC [(2003) 5 SCC 705 : AIR 2003 SC 2629] 
does not elaborate that aspect. Even so, the 
expression must, in our opinion, include all such 
fundamental principles as providing a basis for 
administration of justice and enforcement of law in 
this country. Without meaning to exhaustively 
enumerate the purport of the expression 
‘fundamental policy of Indian law’, we may refer to 
three distinct and fundamental juristic principles 
that must necessarily be understood as a part and 
parcel of the fundamental policy of Indian law. 
The first and foremost is the principle that in every 
determination whether by a court or other authority 
that affects the rights of a citizen or leads to any civil 
consequences, the court or authority concerned is 
bound to adopt what is in legal parlance called a 
‘judicial approach’ in the matter. The duty to adopt a 
judicial approach arises from the very nature of the 
power exercised by the court or the authority does 
not have to be separately or additionally enjoined 
upon the fora concerned. What must be remembered 
is that the importance of a judicial approach in 
judicial and quasi-judicial determination lies in the 
                                                 
25 (2014) 9 SCC 263

pg. 36 
 
fact that so long as the court, tribunal or the 
authority exercising powers that affect the rights or 
obligations of the parties before them shows fidelity 
to judicial approach, they cannot act in an arbitrary, 
capricious or whimsical manner. Judicial approach 
ensures that the authority acts bona fide and deals 
with the subject in a fair, reasonable and objective 
manner and that its decision is not actuated by any 
extraneous consideration. Judicial approach in that 
sense acts as a check against flaws and faults that 
can render the decision of a court, tribunal or 
authority vulnerable to challenge.” 
53.  Having discussed the principle, this Court now adverts to the 
Learned District Judge’s order. After succinctly noting the 
background of the case in hand, the Learned District Judge has 
also managed to capture the gist of the dispute between the 
parties. Thereafter, the issues were summarised and put forth in 
nine short points by the Ld. District Judge, who proceeded to 
hear both parties on all those issues.  
54. It appears from a perusal of the order impugned that the Learned 
District Judge was conscious of his powers under Section 34 of 
the A&C Act. Keeping the same in mind, the Learned District 
Judge perused the impugned award and only after such perusal 
he has come to the opinion that the Learned Tribunal has 
thoroughly scrutinised the evidence to arrive at its conclusion 
pertaining to time not being the essence of the contract. One can 
see the reference to specific paragraphs of the arbitral award at 
various points throughout the impugned order which shows the

pg. 37 
 
 
meticulousness of the Learned District Judge. The Learned 
District Judge was of the opinion that there was no illegality or 
impropriety in the rejection of the Section 27 Application 
preferred by the present Appellant as well.  
55. This Court therefore does not see merit in the contention that the 
Learned District Judge did not apply its mind to the facts of the 
matter presented before it. The Learned District Judge perused 
the award, heard the parties and assessed their contentions. The 
judicial approach having been adopted, in the absence of any 
arbitrariness, capriciousness or whims, this Court is compelled to 
negative this ardent submission of the Appellant. 
V. CONCLUSION: 
56. Therefore, in light of the discussion above, keeping the settled 
principles of law in mind and for the reasons given above, this 
Court is of the considered view that the impugned order as well 
as the Arbitral Award warrant no interference under Section 37 of 
the A & C Act.  
57.  The award of the Learned Arbitral Tribunal of Rs.9,71,06,938/- in 
favour of the present Respondent including pendente lite interest 
on the awarded amount at the rate of 12% per annum with the 
further direction that if the payment is not made within one 
month from the date of the award, the present Appellant would 
be liable to pay interest at the rate of 18% per annum till the date

pg. 38 
 
of actual payment is upheld in its entirety. The Appellant is 
directed to make good the payment without any further delay.  
58. ARBA No.4 of 2021 is disposed on the abovementioned terms. No 
order as to costs.  
 
 
                 ( Dr. S.K. Panigrahi )                              
         Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
Orissa High Court, Cuttack, 
Dated the 3rd July, 2023