Page 1 of 16 
 
 
 IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK 
W.P.(C) No.21048 of 2022  
 
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the 
Constitution of India. 
      
Branch Manager, Urban Co-
Operative Bank Ltd., Gandarpur   
….         Petitioner  
-versus- 
Prakash Prasad and Ors.  …. Opposite Parties 
 
 
    Advocates appeared in the case through Hybrid Mode: 
For Petitioner  : Mr. Manoranjan Mishra, Adv. 
 
For Opposite Parties. :  Mr. Amarjit Keshari Das, Adv. 
(for O.P.1) 
 
                    
    
 
     CORAM:                         
                        Dr. JUSTICE S.K. PANIGRAHI  
     
 
 
DATE OF HEARING:-10.05.2023 
DATE OF JUDGMENT: -03.07.2023 
 
Dr. S.K. Panigrahi, J. 
1. In this Writ Petition, the Petitioner/ Bank has challenged the 
order dated 26.03.2021 passed by the learned President, State 
Consumer Dispute Redressal Commission, Odisha, Cuttack in 
F.A. No.347 of 2006.  
I. FACTS OF THE CASE: 
2. The facts of the case in brief, are that the Opposite Party No.1 as 
an Appellant had filed F.A. No.347 of 2006 challenging the order

Page 2 of 16 
 
dated 20.03.2006 passed by the learned District Consumer 
Dispute Redressal Forum, Cuttack dismissing the C.D. Case 
No.163 of 2004 filed by him. In the said complaint petition the 
Opposite Party No.1 had alleged misappropriation of his money 
deposited with the Petitioner/ Bank through the Opposite Party 
No.2 who is the Agent. The Opposite Party No.2 opened one 
Sanchayeeta Deposit Account with the Petitioner bearing 
No.BM-735 on 28.09.2001. It was to be operated for one year 
under a Pass Book. The process continued till the complainant 
detected that an amount of Rs 44,000/- sent by him through the 
Opposite Party No.2 was not accounted for in his account. So, 
the Opposite Party No.1 lodged a complaint. However, as no 
step was taken on his complaint, the Opposite Party No.1 filed 
aforesaid consumer case for seeking relief. 
3. In the said consumer case, the Petitioner and the Opposite Party 
No.4, after getting notice appeared and contested the case by 
filing their counter in which they had specifically denied 
regarding the deposit made by the Opposite Party No.2 and the 
Bank is no way liable for the same. Moreover, they had also said 
that as the Opposite Party No.2 was under suspension, they 
could not engage him anymore.  
4. In the said case, the Opposite Party No.2 (Agent) appeared by 
engaging an Advocate and filed his counter specifically stating 
that he has not received the amount from the Opposite Party

Page 3 of 16 
 
No.1 at any point of time as claimed by the Opposite Party No.1 
with a view to deposit the same in his account. 
5. The learned District Consumer Forum dismissed the claim of 
the Opposite Party No.1 against the Petitioner as well as 
Opposite Party No.4 holding that it was the Opposite Party 
No.2, who was responsible for misappropriation of money of 
the Opposite Party No.1. He needs to be criminally booked 
besides levy of the civil liability against him. 
6. Against the judgment dated 20.03.2006 passed in C.D. Case 
No.163 of 2004 by the learned District Consumer Disputes 
Redressal Forum, Cuttack, the Opposite Party No.1, who is the 
Complainant, had filed First Appeal No.347 of 2006 before the 
learned State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, 
Odisha, Cuttack. Learned State Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commission, Odisha, Cuttack vide order dated 26.03.2021 
disposed of the F.A. No.347 of 2006 affirming the judgment 
dated 20.03.2006 passed in C.D. Case No.163 of 2004 by the 
learned District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum, Cuttack 
with a modification to the extent that the present Petitioner and 
the Opposite Party No.2 are jointly and severally liable to pay 
Rs.44,000/- to the present Opposite Party No.1/ complainant 
with interest as ordered by the learned district Forum from the 
date of impugned order till the date of realization and rest 
portion of the impugned order was set aside.

Page 4 of 16 
 
II. SUBMISSIONS ADVANCED ON BEHALF OF THE 
PETITIONER/ BANK: 
7. Learned counsel for the Petitioner submitted as under:  
A. Sanchayeeta Deposit Scheme clearly provides for the 
procedure of deposit and also time for verification by the 
depositors in time. The Advocate for the Petitioner and 
the Opposite Party No.4/ Bank could not appear and put 
forth their grievance in time in the aforesaid First Appeal 
No.347 of 2006 before the learned State Consumer 
Disputes Redressal Commission, Odisha, Cuttack. As a 
result of which, the Opposite Party No.1 was  able to 
succeed in his case. Moreover, before passing the order in 
the aforesaid First Appeal, the Opposite Party No.2 was 
dead. Without substituting the legal heirs in place of the 
present Opposite Party No.2 and by suppressing the 
same, the Opposite Party No.1 could get the order in his 
favour.  
B. When the Opposite Party No.1 initiated execution 
proceeding and notice was served on the present 
Petitioner, the Petitioner came to know that the Opposite 
Party No.1 was able to succeed in appeal by suppressing 
all the material facts before the appellate forum which is 
legally not sustainable.

Page 5 of 16 
 
C. The impugned order of the appellate forum may be 
quashed as the same has been passed losing sight of the 
facts that the advocate for the present Petitioner could not 
appear in time and contest the case by placing all the 
documents including the facts of death of Opposite Party 
No.2 (Agent) due to COVID-19 pandemic situation. 
Therefore, the Petitioner could not get an opportunity to 
be heard at the time of hearing of the appeal. 
D. When the Scheme itself is very clear how to deposit and 
how to verify those deposits in time. Without carrying out 
the same after some days, all of a sudden, he has agitated 
all these things which is not maintainable at all and the 
same should not be accepted. Moreover, it was the specific 
case of the Opposite Party No.2 (Agent) that he had not 
collected those amounts. It is difficult to fathom as to how 
and on what basis the appellate forum held that both are 
jointly and severally liable which is not correct at all and 
there is no basis for the same. It is the settled position of 
law that Agent is not the employee of the Bank. For any 
act or commission of the Agent, the principal Bank is not 
responsible. The Bank only be responsible when the agent 
deposits money in the Bank. It is not at all the case that the 
Agent has deposited but the Bank has refused the same. 
The learned State Commission has lost sight of the fact

Page 6 of 16 
 
that the Bank is responsible vide impugned order dated 
26.03.2021 and hence, the same is liable to be set aside. 
E. When the amount was not received from the Opposite 
Party No.1 by the Opposite Party No.2, how would he be 
responsible first. The learned District Consumer Forum 
has held that “the complainant failed to compare the disputed 
handwriting and signature of O.P.3 (the present Opposite Party 
No.2) through the handwriting expert due to want of money. So 
the test that the O.P.3 granted the receipts to the complainant 
after receipt of Rs.44,000/ on different occasions to deposi t those 
in his account at O.P.2 Bank could not be completed”. 
F. It is also settled position of law that commission agent of 
Bank under a special scheme are not actual establishment 
employees of the Bank. For their criminal liability in 
respect of a customer of the Bank, the Bank cannot be 
allowed to suffer any punitive action. 
G. When the Opposite Party No.2, the agent is saying that he 
had not received the amount from the complainant, there 
is no question of attracting the provision of Indian 
Contract Act to hold that all the Opposite Parties are 
jointly and severally liable to pay the money. Moreover, 
the Opposite Party No.2 in his version has specifically said 
that he had not gone to the house of the Opposite Party 
No.1 twice in a day to collect money. So, the receipt

Page 7 of 16 
 
showing the huge amount in one day is not at all correct. 
This was mischievously created only to grab money. 
H.  From the document, it clearly shows the deposit of 
Rs.200/- in each day and sometimes Rs.400/- and not more 
than Rs.1000/- per day. This clarifies about the capacity of 
the complainant. It is the first and foremost duty of the 
appellate court to protect public money when the agent is 
saying that he has not received the amount from the 
Opposite Party No.1. 
I. The Opposite Party No.1 has not come to court with clean 
hands. Moreover, the Opposite Party No.2 was dead prior 
to passing of the order by the appellate authority in 
favour of Opposite Party No.1. The said fact came to the 
knowledge of the Petitioner later. It was the duty of the 
Opposite Party No.1 to intimate the said fact to the court 
immediately. But, the same was not done. So, the order 
itself is a nullity against the dead person. Accordingly, the 
Petitioner has prayed for fresh hearing of the matter after 
due substitution of the legal heirs of Opposite Party No.2.  
III. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE OPPOSITE PARTY 
NO.1: 
8. Learned counsel for the Opposite Party No.1 submitted as 
under:

Page 8 of 16 
 
A. Although the Petitioner stated that no deposit was made by 
the Opposite Party No.2, who had been suspended, in the 
Bank concerning the account of the Opposite Party No.1, the 
Petitioner did not withhold the security amount deposited by 
the Opposite Party No.2 for obtaining agent license from the 
bank. The present Petitioner without adjusting the aforesaid 
security amount of the Opposite Party No.2 (agent) in the 
account of the present Opposite Party No.1 allowed the 
culprit Opposite Party No.2 to withdraw his security deposit 
and went scot free. Thus, the present Petitioner was in league 
with the Opposite Party No.2. 
B. On 12.06.2004, the Opposite Party No.2 received the notice 
for appearance before the learned District Consumer Dispute 
Redressal Forum, Cuttack. However, he consumed more than 
one year time to submit his counter affidavit in C.D Case 
No.163 of 2004. In his reply the said agent took a lame excuse 
that the complainant intoxicated him with liquor and when 
he was not in a fit state of mind, the Complainant had got 
receipts as per his choice. The entire receipts given by the 
agent were scrutinized by the learned District Consumer 
Disputes Redressal Forum, Cuttack and the handwritings 
were similar in all the receipts. Giving receipts with the same 
handwriting even under the influence of liquor is not a fact. 
The present Petitioner got prepared the counter affidavit of

Page 9 of 16 
 
Opposite Party No.2 (agent) alluring him to release his 
security deposit with the bank and also to save him from 
further litigation. The prime intention of the Petitioner was to 
wriggle out the bank from all liabilities as principal.  
C. The learned District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum, 
Cuttack had issue direction in the paragraph 8 of his order 
that the present Petitioner and the Opposite Party No.4 were 
to stop payment, if any, due to the agent from their bank and 
adjust the amount payable to him against the dues of the 
complainant as indicated above within one month after 
receipt of the copy of the order. The case against the present 
Petitioner and the Opposite Party No.4 failed and was 
dismissed. But, the present Petitioner allowed the Opposite 
Party No.2 to get his agent security deposit amount released, 
thereby the present Petitioner is solely responsible for 
compensating the present Opposite Party No.1. 
D. On being noticed in the First Appeal No.347 of 2006 by the 
learned State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, 
Cuttack, the present Petitioner appeared and for a long time 
but the matter could not be taken up by the learned State 
Commission due to some administrative reasons. But, the 
case was regularly taken up of on 07.08.2020, 20.10.2020, 
05.01.2021. Finally on 26.03.2021, when on all these dates the 
present Petitioner deliberately did not appear, considering

Page 10 of 16 
 
the documents relied upon by the present Opposite Party 
No.1 and on perusing the L.C.R. of the lower court, the 
learned State Commission passed the final order. Therefore, 
the learned State Commission has not committed any error in 
passing the aforesaid final order. 
E. The present Petitioner had suppressed the material fact with 
regard to the death of the present Opposite Party No.2. It is 
the fact that the Opposite Party No.2 being noticed in C.D 
Case No.163 of 2004 (before the District Consumer Disputes 
Redressal Commission, Cuttack) and also in F.A No.347 of 
2006 (Before the State Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commission, Cuttack) filed his written statement. So, the fact 
of death of the Opposite Party No.2 was not within the 
knowledge of the present Opposite Party No.1. When the 
present Petitioner had the knowledge of such death, they 
could have duly intimated the Learned State Commission to 
that effect.  But, they deliberately kept silence and did not 
appear before the learned State Commission and now trying 
to put the present Opposite Party No.1 to unnecessary 
harassment since the matter is lingering for more than 19 
years due to the non-cooperating attitude of the present 
Petitioner. 
F. Both the learned District Forum and the State Commission 
has held that the agent had received various amounts from

Page 11 of 16 
 
the Opposite Party No.1 and had given acknowledgment of 
receipts. Admittedly, the Opposite Party No.2 was an agent 
of the bank and the bank being the Principal, is liable for the 
acts of the agent. The Petitioner/bank being the Principal has 
the liability towards its customers. On the other hand, the 
bank may be held responsible since the Petitioner/bank has 
clandestinely allowed the agent to withdraw his security 
deposit amount from the bank and go away scot free. Now, 
the bank feigns innocence but was actively in league with the 
agent in defeating the genuine claims of the Opposite Party 
No.2. 
G. The Opposite Party No.2 in paragraph -3 in his reply before 
the District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, 
Cuttack had stated that he had issued receipts after taking 
liquor and he was not in a fit state of mind. So, there was no 
question for sending the handwritings to the expert. 
Moreover, the learned Court in seisin over the matter 
physically verified the original receipts submitted before 
them and came to the conclusion that the said receipts were 
issued by the agent. Since, the agent was appointed by the 
bank by using the bank printed receipts to collect amount 
from the customers, for and on behalf of the principal 
(Petitioner Bank), the bank is liable for the acts of its erring 
agents.

Page 12 of 16 
 
H.  The Petitioner/bank was hand-in-gloves with the agent to 
cause heavy financial loss to its customer (Opposite Party 
No.1). When the present Opposite Party No.1 made 
allegations against the Opposite Party No.2 (agent) on 
11.08.2003 through registered post, the bank vide letter 
No.85/03-04 dated 13.08.2003 wrote to the Opposite Party 
No.2 to deposit the entire receipts in the bank for verification 
and Opposite Party No.2 submitted the same on 20.08.2003. 
When the Petitioner/bank did not dispose of the complaints 
of the Opposite Party No.1 (Customer) and kept it pending 
for long 9 months. Therefore, the Opposite Party No.1 sent 
demand notice dated 14.05.2004 through his Counsel. The 
bank deliberately did not dispose of the claim of the Opposite 
Party No.1. On the other hand, the bank assisted the agent to 
go away gracefully with his deposited security amount kept 
in custody of the bank. Now the Petitioner/bank is pleading 
on behalf of the agent to prove his innocence. 
I. The Opposite Party No.1 had filed the consumer case before 
the learned District Forum and also filed Appeal before the 
State Dispute Redressal Commission and in both the forums 
the Petitioner/Bank was served notice. They appeared and 
filed their reply. But, the present Petitioner did not appear 
through their counsel and the case being an old case was 
disposed of by the learned State Commission vide order

Page 13 of 16 
 
dated 26.03.2021. The present Opposite Party No.1 had no 
knowledge about the death of Opposite Party No.2. When the 
present Petitioner had such information, they could have 
informed it before the State commission. 
J. The present Writ Petition is not maintainable in view of the 
availability of alternative forum. Since the learned State 
Consumer Dispute Redressal Commission (SCDRC) has 
passed the final Order in F.A No.347 of 2006 vide order dated 
26.03.2021, the alternative forum is National Consumer 
Dispute Redressal Commission (NCDRC). Therefore, the 
instant case may not be allowed to be challenged before this 
Court. The statute prescribes that NCDRC is the Appellate 
Forum.  
IV. CONCLUSION AND ORDER: 
9. The State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Odisha, 
Cuttack vide order dated 26.03.2021 disposed of the F.A. No.347 
of 2006 affirming the judgment dated 20.03.2006 passed in C.D. 
Case No.163 of 2004 by the learned District Consumer Disputes 
Redressal Forum, Cuttack with a modification to the extent that 
the present Petitioner and the Opposite Party No.2 are jointly 
and severally liable to pay Rs.44,000/- to the present Opposite 
Party No.1/ complainant with interest as ordered by the learned 
district Forum from the date of impugned order till the date of 
realization and rest portion of the impugned order is set aside.

Page 14 of 16 
 
10. The Supreme Court in State Bank of India (Successor to the 
Imperial Bank of India) v. Smt. Shyama Devi 1 held that for the 
employer to be liable, it is not enough that the employment 
afforded the servant or agent an opportunity of committing the 
crime, but what is relevant is whether the crime, in the form of 
fraud etc., was perpetrated by the servant/employee during the 
course of his employment. Once this is established, the 
employer would be liable for the employee’s wrongful act, even 
if it amounts to a crime. Whether the fraud is committed during 
the course of employment would be a question of fact that needs 
to be determined in the facts and circumstances of the case. 
11. In this regard, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended 
that it was the specific case of the Opposite Party No.2 (Agent) 
that he had not collected those amounts. How and on what basis 
the appellate forum held that both are jointly and severally 
liable which is not correct at all and there is no basis for the 
same. It is the settled position of law that Agent is not the 
employee of the Bank. For any act or commission of the Agent, 
the Bank is not responsible. It is the bank which will be 
responsible when the agent deposited the money in Bank. It is 
not a case that the Agent has deposited but the Bank has refused 
the same. Learned Counsel for the Opposite Party no.1 has 
clarified that although the Petitioner stated that no deposit was 
                                                 
1 AIR 1978 SC 1263

Page 15 of 16 
 
made by the Opposite Party No.2, who had been suspended, in 
the Bank concerning the account of the Opposite Party No.1, the 
Petitioner did not withhold the security amount deposited by 
the Opposite Party No.2 for obtaining agent license from the 
bank. The present Petitioner without adjusting the aforesaid 
security amount of the Opposite Party No.2 (agent) in the 
account of the present Opposite Party No.1 allowed the culprit 
Opposite Party No.2 to withdraw his security deposit and to 
allow him to go scot free. Thus, the present Petitioner was in 
league with the Opposite Party No.2. 
12. Furthermore, it is pertinent to mention that since the learned 
State Consumer Dispute Redressal Commission (SCDRC) has 
passed the final Order in F.A No.347 of 2006 vide order dated 
26.03.2021 and the appellate forum is National Consumer 
Dispute Redressal Commission (NCDRC) as per Section 19 of 
the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. In K.V. Padmanabhan v. 
Consumer Dispute Redressal Forum, Ernakulam 2, it has been 
held as follows: 
“The High Court is not a statutory appellate of 
revisional authority under the provisions of the 
Act. An order made by the District Forum is 
appealable under Section 15 only before the State 
Commission. An order passed by the State 
Commission is appealable only before the National 
Commission under Section 19 and the order of the 
                                                 
2 AIR 1992 Ker 179

Page 16 of 16 
 
National Commission could be challenged in 
appeal only before the Supreme Court under 
Section 23.” 
13.  In light of the aforesaid discussion and the cases cited 
hereinabove, this Court is of the opinion that the Petitioner 
should have filed the appeal under Section 19 of the Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986 before the National Commission against the 
order of State Commission. Accordingly, the Petitioner is 
granted liberty to approach the appellate forum provided in the 
statute.  
14.  Accordingly, this Writ Petition is disposed of.  
 
 
 
                     ( Dr. S.K. Panigrahi ) 
              Judge 
 
 
 
Orissa High Court, Cuttack, 
Dated the 3rd July, 2023/B. Jhankar