CRLMC No. 410 of 2020                                                                 Page 1 of 15 
 
 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK 
 
CRLMC No.410 of 2020
 
(In the matter of an appeal under Section 482 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure).  
   
 
Biswaroopa Pati @ Mohanty 
 
…. Petitioner 
-versus- 
State of Odisha & another … Opposite parties 
     
For Petitioner : Mr. G. Mishra,Sr. Advocate 
 
For Opposite 
Parties 
: Mr. S.S.Pradhan, AGA for 
O.P. No.1 
Mr.B.Pujari, Advocate for 
O.P. No.2 
 
                    
  CORAM: 
                        JUSTICE G. SATAPATHY 
                             
 
 
  DATE OF ARGUMENT: 03.05.2023           
        DATE OF JUDGMENT: 01.06.2023 
   
G. Satapathy, J. 
 
1. By way of this application U/S. 482 of Cr.P.C. the 
petitioner seeks to quash the criminal proceeding 
instituted against her in G.R. Case No. 1818 of 2018 
arising out of Cuttack Mahila P.S. Case No. 93 of 
2018 pending in the file of learned S.D.J.M.(Sadar),

CRLMC No. 410 of 2020                                                                 Page 2 of 15 
 
Cuttack on the grounds inter alia some omnibus and 
unspecific allegations have been made against her.  
2. The facts in background are that the petitioner 
being the elder sister of the groom is the sister-in-law 
of informant-bride and on 30.06.2017 the informant 
bride got married to the younger brother of the 
petitioner, but it was alleged by the informant that 
she was subjected to various mental and physical 
torture by her husband and other in-laws for demand 
of more dowry. Accordingly, the bride had lodged an 
FIR against her husband and in-laws including the 
petitioner before the IIC, Cuttack Mahila P.S. for 
commission of offence punishable U/Ss. 498-A/294/ 
506/34 of IPC read with Section 4 of D.P. Act which 
was registered vide Cuttack Mahila P.s. Case No. 93 
dated 25.09.2018 and the matter was investigated 
into resulting in submission of charge sheet against 
the petitioner and others for the aforesaid offences

CRLMC No. 410 of 2020  Page 3 of 15 
 
under which cognizance was taken by the learned 
S.D.J.M.(Sadar), Cuttack. 
 Feeling aggrieved with the order taking cognizance 
of offences, the petitioner has approached this Court 
in an application U/S. 482 of Cr.P.C. seeking to quash 
the criminal proceeding instituted against her on the 
grounds inter alia that no offence is made out against 
her and there is only some omnibus/general and 
unspecific allegations have been made by the 
informant against her. 
3. In the course of hearing of CRLMC, Mr.Goutam 
Mishra, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has 
submitted the petitioner is the married younger 
sister-in-law of the informant who has made some 
reckless and vague allegations against her to rope 
the present petitioner in this case along with husband 
and in-laws. It is pointed out by the learned Senior 
Counsel that there is in fact no allegation appearing 
against the petitioner in the F.I.R. except some

CRLMC No. 410 of 2020                                                                 Page 4 of 15 
 
casual reference to her name and there is a long 
delay in lodging of F.I.R. and there are some bald and 
omnibus allegations which are unspecific have been 
stated to be mentioned in the F.I.R. and a bare 
perusal of the statement of the informant and other 
witnesses would further unveil only omnibus 
allegations against the present petitioner who being a 
married lady resides in a separate mess than that of 
her parental home. It is, accordingly, submitted by 
the learned Senior Counsel that the present 
proceeding against the petitioner is nothing but an 
abuse of process of Court and the same may kindly 
be quashed. In order to buttress his submissions, 
learned Senior Counsel has cited the authorities in (i) 
Kahkashan Kausar @ Sonam and Others vs. 
State of Bihar and Others; (2022) 6 SCC 599, 
(ii) Preeti Gupta and Another vs. State of 
Jharkhand and Another; (2010) 7 SCC 667 and

CRLMC No. 410 of 2020  Page 5 of 15 
 
(iii) Seenivasan vs. State and Another; (2019) 8 
SCC 642. 
4. Mr. S.S. Pradhan, learned A.G.A. has submitted 
that there is not only prima facie allegations against 
the petitioner, but also the allegations appearing 
against her is specific for commission of offences 
whereunder cognizance of the offences has already 
been taken by the learned S.D.J.M. (S), Cuttack. It is 
further submitted that when a criminal case is sought 
to be quashed at initial stage, it has to be 
demonstrated on a conspectus of record that the 
uncontroverted allegations made in the F.I.R. and the 
evidence collected in support of the same do not 
disclose commission of any offence or make out the 
case against the accused and in case the allegations 
made in the F.I.R. or complaint taken at their face 
value and accepted in entirety do not prima facie 
constitute any case against the accused,  it would be 
in the realm of the High Court to quash such criminal

CRLMC No. 410 of 2020                                                                 Page 6 of 15 
 
proceeding, but when the case at hand discloses 
strong prima facie case against the petitioner, the 
criminal proceeding cannot and ought not to be 
quashed by merely terming it as to have been 
brought on some omnibus and general allegations. 
Learned A.G.A. accordingly has prayed to dismiss the 
CRLMC. 
5. Mr. Basudev Pujari, learned counsel appearing for 
O.P. No. 02 has submitted that the submission of 
charge sheet itself is indicative of prima facie case 
against the petitioner for commission of offences and 
there is specific allegations made against the present 
petitioner by the informant in her F.I.R. and the same 
has been substantiated not only by her statement 
U/S. 161 of Cr.P.C., but also by the statement of her 
parents and other witnesses. It is further submitted 
that, the present petitioner has played a definite 
pivotal role in the marital dispute of the informant 
and her husband and she was instrumental in driving

CRLMC No. 410 of 2020  Page 7 of 15 
 
out the informant from her matrimonial house. Mr. 
Pujari, learned counsel for O.P. No. 02 has also relied 
upon the decisions in Rajeev Kourav vs. Baisahab 
and Others; (2020) 3 SCC 317  to contend that 
assessing the statement of witness U/S. 161 of 
Cr.P.C. to quash the criminal proceeding is 
impermissible in the eye of law and it would be highly 
improper to appreciate contradictions/inconsistencies 
in the statement of witnesses at the stage of 482 
Cr.P.C. In summing up his argument, learned counsel 
for O.P. No. 02 has prayed to dismiss the CRLMC by 
relying upon another decision in Md. Allauddin 
Khan Vrs. the State of Bihar & others  in Criminal 
Appeal No. 675 of 2019 (Arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.) 
No. 1151 of 2018 disposed of on 15.04.2019). 
6.  Admittedly, the petitioner is the sister-in-law of 
the informant and she has approached this Court to 
quash the criminal proceeding against her on the 
grounds inter-alia that some general and omnibus

CRLMC No. 410 of 2020                                                                 Page 8 of 15 
 
allegations have been alleged against her by the 
informant. It is, however, clear that the offence of 
dowry torture U/S. 498-A of IPC has often being 
misused against the in-laws to pressurize the family 
of the husband and there is a tendency of over 
implication of relatives of the husband who often 
reside in separate mess or even at a distant place 
than the matrimonial home of the bride. In such 
situation, the Court has onerous duty to check the 
over implication of the relatives of a husband. It is 
also true that there are some genuine cases of dowry 
torture in which the mother-in-law and sister-in-law 
play vital role, apart from the errant husband and 
other in-laws and the Court has to be very careful 
while dealing with matter concerning matrimonial 
disputes between husband and wife to separate 
genuine case from cases of over implication and 
vexatious cases. Section 498-A of IPC was enacted to 
ensure to prevent a married woman from harassment

CRLMC No. 410 of 2020  Page 9 of 15 
 
and cruelty at the hands of husband or relatives of 
husband of such woman, but it is a matter of great 
concern that a large number of cases continued to be 
filed U/S. 498-A of IPC alleging harassment of 
married woman and often such complaints are 
made/filed in the heat of passion over trivial issues 
and even many such complaints are not bonafide, 
however, some cases are genuine cases of dowry 
torture.  
7. On proceeding to appreciate the rival submissions, 
this Court now falls back upon the allegation leveled 
against the petitioner in the FIR which on plain 
perusal discloses some allegation against the 
petitioner such as “she and her father forced the 
father of the informant to arrange the marriage at 
Pramod Resort at Cuttack ” and “she and her mother 
expressed anguish on the informant for failure to 
bring more gold ornaments and not agreeing to keep 
her gold ornaments in the locker of her mother-in-

CRLMC No. 410 of 2020                                                                 Page 10 of 15 
 
law” and “they used to inflict mental torture on her ” 
and “her husband and her younger sister-in-law had 
been scolding her very often ”. In concluding part of 
the FIR, the informant has alleged that since her 
husband, sister-in-law(petitioner) and mother-in-law 
had been torturing her using filthy language to get  
valuable property from her parents and depriving her 
from her conjugal life, she lodged the FIR. The 
informant has also stated that they had agreed for 
the marriage without any dowry. The statement of 
the informant also contains more or less the same 
allegation as stated in the FIR. The statement of the 
father of the informant also reveals that he was 
compelled to arrange marriage at Pramod Resort on 
the pressure of the petitioner and the petitioner and 
her mother were looking down upon the informant 
which is also the allegation as found in the statement 
of the mother of the informant.

CRLMC No. 410 of 2020  Page 11 of 15 
 
8. In the course of argument, learned counsel for 
O.P. No.2 has relied upon the decision in Rajeev 
Kourav(supra) to contend that appreciation of 
statement of witnesses in a proceeding U/S. 482 of 
Cr.P.C. is impermissible and this Court is also 
conscious of such principle as laid down by Apex 
Court, but when the material allegations brought 
against an accused in statement of witness and FIR 
do not disclose commission of any offence, it is not 
legally tenable to prosecute such accused against 
whom there is no credible or reliable allegations 
leveled. On the other hand, the decision relied on by 
the petitioner in Kahkashan Kausar @ 
Sonam(supra), the Apex Court upon noticing 
absence of specific and distinct allegations against 
the appellants has allowed the application to quash 
the FIR against the appellants. In quashing the FIR, 
the Apex Court in the aforesaid decision has further 
held at paragraph-18 as under:-

CRLMC No. 410 of 2020                                                                 Page 12 of 15 
 
  ” Coming to the facts of this case, 
upon a perusal of the contents of the 
FIR dated 01.04.19, it is revealed 
that general allegations are levelled 
against the Appellants. The 
complainant alleged that “all accused 
harassed her mentally and 
threatened her of terminating her 
pregnancy”. Furthermore, no specific 
and distinct allegations have been 
made against either of the Appellants 
herein, i.e., none of the Appellants 
have been attributed any specific role 
in furtherance of the general 
allegations made against them. This 
simply leads to a situation wherein 
one fails to ascertain the role played 
by each accused in furtherance of the 
offence. The allegations are therefore 
general and omnibus and can at best 
be said to have been made out on 
account of small skirmishes. Insofar 
as husband is concerned, since he 
has not appealed against the order of 
the High court, we have not 
examined the veracity of allegations 
made against him. However, as far as 
the Appellants are concerned, the 
allegations made against them being 
general and omnibus, do not warrant 
prosecution”. 
 
9. In this case, of course, an affidavit has been filed 
by O.P. No.2 to indicate that the petitioner is not 
residing in separate mess, but she very often

CRLMC No. 410 of 2020  Page 13 of 15 
 
resides/remains in the house of her father 
Nrushingha Charan Pati with the other accused 
persons, but how far such an affidavit would be 
relevant in this case is never understood since a 
married woman normally resides in her matrimonial 
home unless she has got some matrimonial disputes 
with her in-laws and in this case, there is hardly any 
allegation against the petitioner for having any 
dispute with her in-laws. Besides, the decision in Md. 
Allauddin Khan(supra)  has been relied upon by 
O.P. No.2, but the same being for offences punishable 
U/Ss. 323/379/34 of IPC is not applicable to the 
present situation wherein the petitioner has sought 
for quashing of complaint on the ground of omnibus 
and general allegations made against her by relying 
upon the decision in Kahkashan Kausar @ 
Sonam(supra). 
10. A perusal of the allegations made against the 
petitioner on record, this Court does not find any

CRLMC No. 410 of 2020                                                                 Page 14 of 15 
 
specific allegation against the petitioner, rather all the 
allegations made against the petitioner as narrated in 
the preceding paragraph are nothing sort of some 
omnibus and unspecific allegations leveled against 
her and thereby, the principle as laid down by Apex 
Court in Kahkashan Kausar @ Sonam(supra) , 
would enure to the benefit of the petitioner. 
11. In view of the discussions made hereinabove and 
taking into consideration the law laid down by the 
Apex Court in Kahkashan Kausar @ 
Sonam(supra) and there being some omnibus and 
unspecific allegations leveled against the petitioner 
who is the married sister-in-law of the informant, this 
Court does not find any justifiable reason to summon 
the petitioner to face the proceeding in the aforesaid 
case and the criminal proceeding, thereby, is nothing 
but an abuse of process of Court and to secure the 
ends of justice, the criminal proceeding against the 
petitioner is required to be quashed. It is, however,

CRLMC No. 410 of 2020  Page 15 of 15 
 
made clear that the criminal proceeding against rest 
of the accused persons having being not challenged 
and the learned Senior Counsel in the course of 
argument has clearly submitted to have no objection 
if the criminal proceeding continues against the rest 
of the accused persons, the criminal proceeding may 
continue against the rest of the accused persons.       
12. In the result, the CRLMC stands allowed on 
contest, but in the circumstance there is no order as 
to costs. The criminal proceeding against the 
petitioner in G.R. Case No. 1818 of 2018 arising out 
of Cuttack Mahila P.S. Case No. 93 of 2018 pending 
in the file of learned S.D.J.M.(Sadar), Cuttack is 
hereby quashed.          
  
                        (G. Satapathy)  
                                                           Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Orissa High Court, Cuttack, 
Dated the 1st day  of June, 2023/Kishore