Page 1 of 15 
 
 
 IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK 
WPC(OA) No.1499 of 2015  
 
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the 
Constitution of India. 
      
Monalisa Pattnaik   ….         Petitioner  
-versus- 
State of Orissa and Ors.  …. Opposite Parties 
 
 
    Advocates appeared in the case through Hybrid Mode: 
For Petitioner  : Mr. Manoj Kumar Khuntia, Adv. 
 
For Opposite Parties. :  Mr. H.K. Panigrahi, ASC 
 
                    
    
 
     CORAM:                         
                        DR. JUSTICE S.K. PANIGRAHI  
     
 
 
DATE OF HEARING:-20.04.2023 
DATE OF JUDGMENT: -03.07.2023 
 
Dr. S.K. Panigrahi, J. 
1. In this Petition, the Petitioner has made a prayer to quash the 
selection of the Opposite Party No.4 (Rachita Pradhan) and to 
direct the Opposite Parties/ State to appoint her as contract 
Classical Teacher in the district of Khurda.  
I. FACTS OF THE CASE: 
2. The facts of the case, in brief, are that the Opposite Party No.2/ 
Director, Secondary Education, Odisha, Bhubaneswar invited 
application from eligible candidates belonging to different

Page 2 of 15 
 
revenue districts from the State for engagement of qualified 
teacher on contractual basis in different Government High 
Schools. The Petitioner being an eligible candidate has applied 
in respect of Khurdha district against the post of Classical 
Teacher. 
3. A resolution was issued by the Opposite Party No.1/ Secretary, 
School and Mass Education Department, Odisha, Bhubaneswar 
prescribing the recruitment procedure of teaching staff in 
Government secondary schools. As per Clause-1 of the 
resolution in order to be eligible for engagement a candidate 
must satisfy the following conditions: 
 (a) He/She must be a citizen of India, 
 (b) (i) He/ She must have passed the High School Certifi cate or 
an equivalent or any higher examination with Oriya as a 
language subject, or 
 (ii) He/ She must have Oriya as a medium of examination in 
non-language subject at the High School Certificate or equivalent 
examination, which He/ She has passed. 
 (c)  Candidates having Bachelor degree in Arts/ Commerce/ 
Science with Bachelor degree in Education from any Universitie s 
of the State or its equivalency are eligible.  Regarding 
Universities/ Institutions of outside State, the candidates shall 
only be eligible for engagement after verification of genuineness of 
their educational/ training qualification from concerned 
University/ institutions from which they have obtained the degree 
by the concerned DEO.

Page 3 of 15 
 
(d) Such outside University/ Institution candidates shall have to 
produce the authenticated proof of equivalency and NCTE 
recognition in support of their qualification at the time of 
verification failing which they will not be eligible in th e selection 
process.  
(e) The case of PH candidates shall be referred to Appellate  
Medical Board constituted by the W & CD Department vide 
Notification No.16430/WCD Date 06.09.2011 for re-
examination. Engagement order shall be issued if such candidates 
are found genuine by the Board.  
Clause-2 of the said Resolution prescribes as follows:  
“2. Age- Candidates shall be under 32 years of age 
and above 21 years of age as on 30.09.2014. 
However, in case of SC/ST, Women, OBC/SEBC, 
ex-military persons, the upperage shall be relaxed by 
5 years and in case of PH candidates the upper age 
shall be relaxed by 10 years. This is done in 
conformity with G.A. Deptt. Notification No.-
33068/ Gen. Dtd.27.10.1989 (Odisha Civil Service, 
fixation of Upper Age Limit Rules, 1989) and SEBC 
Act.” 
Educational qualification for Classical Teacher (Sanskrit) 
prescribed in Clause-3(c) of the said Resolution are as follows:  
 
“3. Educational Qualification 
Xx xx xx xx  
(c) Bachelors Degree with Sanskrit as one of the 
optional/Hons subject from a recognized University 
with minimum 50% marks in aggregate (45% for 
SC/ST/PH/OBC/SEBC Candidates) with Sikshaya 
Shastri (Sanskrit) (a course prescribed by NCTE) 
from a recognized university/institution recognized 
by NCTE and affiliated to a recognized university or

Page 4 of 15 
 
Shastri (Sanskrit) with minimum 50% marks in 
aggregrate (45% for SC/ST/PH/OBC/SEBC 
Candidates) from recognized university and 
Sikshaya Shastri (Sanskrit) (a course prescribed by 
NCTE) from a recognized university/ institution 
recognized by NCTE and affiliated to a recognized 
university or Acharya (Except Jyotisacharya and 
Ayurvedacharya) or Sahityacharya with minimum 
50% marks in aggregate from a recognized 
university or Bachelor's degree with Sanskrit as one 
of the optional/Hons subject from a recognized 
University with minimum 50% marks in aggregate 
(45%for SC/ST/PH/OBC/SEBC Candidates) and 
M.A in Sanskrit with minimum 50% marks in 
aggregate from a recognized University. (The 
untrained candidates shall have to undergo required 
training within the timeline as prescribed by the 
Government).” 
The committee for selection shall be constituted under the 
chairmanship of Collector. A merit list shall be prepared on the 
basis of the percentage of the marks secured in HSC 
Examination (without 4 th optional) BA/B.Sc/BCOM. and B.Ed. 
examination in case of TG Arts and Science and in case of 
Sanskrit, Hindi, Telugu, Urdu and PET Teachers, the percentage 
of marks secured by a candidate in each qualifying examination. 
In case two or more candidates secure the same marks, the 
candidates older in age will be placed above in the merit list. A 
merit list with equal number of vacancies shall be drawn for 
each category of the posts. The concerned District Education 
Officer after approval of the Collector shall engage candidates

Page 5 of 15 
 
on contract basis out of the merit list prepared under intimation 
to the Director, Secondary Education and the Government of 
Odisha in School and Mass Education Department. Accordingly 
advertisement was issued for filling up different posts in 
different districts of the State. Further a corrigendum was issued 
on 06.01.2015 prescribing the recruitment procedure of teaching 
staff in Government Secondary Schools.  
4. Pursuant to the said advertisement the Petitioner along with 
other candidates applied to be considered for the post of 
Classical Teacher in respect of Khurda district against 21 
vacancies of different categories. On the basis of the marks, a 
common merit was prepared where the name of the Petitioner 
finds place at serial No.682. From the said list, it would be 
evident that the Petitioner has secured 268.0806 marks. 
Thereafter, a provisional select list for the post of classical 
teacher in respect of Khurda district was published wherein 
names of 17 candidates finds place against 21 vacancies. It is 
pertinent to mention here that out 21 vacancies, 11 posts meant 
for UR, 2 posts for SEBC, 3 post for SC and 5 posts for ST 
candidates. It would be evident from the select list that 
candidates securing less mark than the petitioner have been 
selected whereas the petitioner has not been selected. When it is 
the admitted fact that Opposite Party No.4 securing less mark 
than the Petitioner has been selected, the Petitioner deserves

Page 6 of 15 
 
selection for the aforesaid post. Non-consideration of the 
Petitioner’s case for engagement as Classical Teacher is illegal 
and arbitrary. Therefore, the Petitioner is constrained to 
approach this Court.  
II. SUBMISSIONS ADVANCED ON BEHALF OF THE 
PETITIONER: 
5. Learned counsel for the Petitioner submitted as under:  
A. In response to the advertisement issued by the Opposite 
Parties, the Petitioner has applied for the post of Classical 
Teacher (Sanskrit). Though she has secured higher mark 
but was not selected. Whereas the candidates securing less 
mark than her are selected. In the counter the Opposite 
Parties have not denied the percentage of mark secured by 
the Petitioner is more than the percentage of mark secured 
by Opposite Party No.4. The only stand taken in Para-4 of 
the counter affidavit that in case of non-availability of 
trained candidates, untrained candidates shall be 
considered for engagement as contract teacher and as the 
Petitioner was untrained he was not selected. But, no such 
document has been annexed to the counter affidavit to 
substantiate such stand. 
B. The question arises for consideration whether in absence 
of any such terms in the advertisement /resolution, the

Page 7 of 15 
 
Opposite Parties taking the said plea can deny 
appointment to a more meritorious candidates. 
C. As per Resolution 27.10.2014, the eligibility criteria for 
Classical Teacher (Sanskrit) is “he/she must have obtained 
bachelors degree with Sanskrit as one of the optional/Hons 
subject from a recognized University with minimum 50% 
marks in aggregate(45% for SC/ST/PH/OBC/SEBC 
Candidates) with sikshya shastri (Sanskrit) (a course prescribed 
by NCTE) from a recognized university/institution recognized 
by NCTEand affiliated to a recognized university or Shastr i 
(Sanskrit) with minimum 50% marks in aggregate (45%for 
SC/ST/PH/OBC/SEBC Candidates) from a recognized 
university and Sikshya Shastri (Sanskrit)(a course prescribed by 
NCTE) from a recognized university/institution recognized by 
NCTE and affiliated to a recognized university or Acharya 
(except Jyotischarya and Ayurvedachrya)or Sahityacharya with 
minimum50% marks in aggregate from a recognized university 
or Bachelor's degree with Sanskrit as one of the optional/Hons 
subject from a recognized University with minimum 50% 
marks in aggregate (45% for SC/ST/ PH/ OBC/ SEBC 
Candidates) and M.A in Sanskrit with minimum 50% marks in 
aggregate from a recognized University”. 
D. The Petitioner possesses the eligibility criteria as per the 
said resolution which would be evident from Annexure-2

Page 8 of 15 
 
series. There is no mention in the advertisement that in 
case of non-availability of trained Classical Teacher 
(Sanskrit), untrained candidates shall be engaged for 
contract teacher. On the other hand, the resolution speaks 
that untrained candidates shall have to undergo required 
training within the time line as prescribed by the 
Government. Further, as per the corrigendum issued on 
06.01.2015 by the Opposite Party No.1, the selection in 
respect of Sanskrit teachers will be done as per the marks 
obtained in HSC +2, +3 with Sanskrit or Sastri and 
Sikshyasastri shall be taken into consideration. Similarly 
as per the resolution dated 27.10.2014 for selection of 
Sanskrit teachers the percentage mark secured by a 
candidate in each qualifying examination is to be taken 
into account. As the Petitioner has the requisite 
qualification and taking into the percentage of marks in 
each qualifying examination, her total mark come to 
268.0806. 
E. The Petitioner is not selected in any relaxed norm but her 
selection was done as per the terms and conditions of the 
advertisement and resolutions under Annexure-1 series. 
There is no stipulation in the resolution with regard to 
trained and untrained for selection of Classical Teacher. 
When the Petitioner has secured more mark than the

Page 9 of 15 
 
Opposite Party No.4, she deserves for appointment. The 
Petitioner has secured 268.0806 mark whereas the 
Opposite Party No.4 has secured 250.833 mark. The 
Petitioner having secured more mark than the Opposite 
Party No.4 deserves for appointment when there is no 
distinction between trained and untrained candidates in 
respect of Classical Teacher as per the Resolution under 
Annexure-1. Hence, denial of appointment to the 
Petitioner illegal and in violation of the fundamental 
rights guaranteed under Article 14 and 16 of the 
Constitution of India.  
III. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE OPPOSITE PARTY 
NOS.1, 2 & 3: 
6. Learned counsel for the State submitted as under:  
A. The averments/allegations of the Petitioner is based on 
misconception and mis-representation of facts and law. The 
Petitioner is not entitled to get any relief as has been prayed 
for in the aforesaid Writ Petition. 
B. The School and Mass Education Department issued 
Resolution dated 27.10.2014 prescribing recruitment 
procedure of teaching staff in Government Secondary 
Schools. As per the Resolution, in order to eligible for 
engagement as Classical Teacher (Sanskrit), a candidate must 
have obtained Acharya or Sahityacharya or M.A. in Sanskrit

Page 10 of 15 
 
or its equivalent degree from a recognized 
University/Institution or a Bachelors Degree with Sanskrit as 
one of the Optional Subject from a recognized University 
with Sikshaya Sastri (Sanskrit from a recognized University 
or Sastri (Sanskrit) with Sikshaya Sastri (Sanskrit) from a 
recognized University. In the said advertisement it was also 
mentioned that in case of non-availability of trained 
candidates, untrained candidates shall be considered for 
engagement as contact teacher. 
C. Further, the School and Mass Education Department issued 
Corrigendum dated 06.01.2015 in order to ensure 
engagement of qualified trained teachers for providing 
quality education in the interest of students and modify Para-
2, 7, 8 and 9 of the Resolution dated 27.10.2014. In the said 
corrigendum at Clause-8 for selection of Classical Teacher 
(Sanskrit) it has been prescribed that while preparing draft 
merit list the marks obtained in HSC, +2, +3/B.A. with 
Sanskrit or Sashtry and Sikhya Sashtry shall be taken into 
consideration. 
D. Pursuant to advertisement, the Petitioner having Bachelor 
Degree with Sanskrit as one of the subject and M.A. in 
Sanskrit applied for the post of Contract Teacher (Sanskrit) in 
respect of Khurda district. After preparation of provisional 
merit list, the name of the Petitioner finds place at Sl. No.682

Page 11 of 15 
 
with remark that "eligible under relaxed norm". Thereafter, in 
accordance with time scheduled fixed by the S & ME 
Department, provisional select list for the post of Classical 
Teacher in respect of Khurda district was published. In the 
said list as per advertisement, Unreserved (UR) candidates 
having training qualification have been selected for 
engagement as Contract Teacher (Sanskrit). The allegation of 
the Petitioner that candidates securing less mark than the 
Petitioner have been selected is totally incorrect and false. In 
this regard, it is submitted that as per advertisement, 11 posts 
were earmarked for unreserved candidates. Accordingly, 
select list of unreserved candidates was prepared taking into 
account the marks obtained by the candidates in H.S.C., +2, 
+3/B.A. with Sanskrit or Shastri and Sikhya Shastri. As per 
the advertisement, all the 11 posts of Contract Teacher 
(Sanskrit) have been filled up by the selected trained 
candidates. Therefore, when the Petitioner is an untrained 
candidate, she cannot claim parity to that of the trained 
candidates and she cannot say that she is more meritorious 
than other trained candidates even though she possessed 
more marks in toto than others. When the Petitioner having 
lack of training qualification, she is estopped to claim 
parity/equity with that of the candidates possessing 
eligibility training qualification prescribed in the

Page 12 of 15 
 
advertisement. The Opposite Party No.4 (Rachita Pradhan) is 
an unreserved trained candidate and is eligible as per 
qualification prescribed in the advertisement. The averments 
that erroneous selection process, discriminatory treatment 
and violation of Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India 
does not arise at all. In view of the facts and circumstances, 
he submitted that the case is not maintainable and being 
devoid of merit is liable to be dismissed. 
IV. CONCLUSION AND ORDER: 
7. On the basis of the marks, a common merit list was prepared 
where the name of the Petitioner finds place at serial No.682. 
From the said list, it would be evident that the Petitioner has 
secured 268.0806 marks. Thereafter, a provisional select list for 
the post of classical teacher in respect of Khurda district was 
published wherein names of 17 candidates finds place against 21 
vacancies. It is profitable to mention here that out 21 vacancies, 
11 posts meant for UR, 2 posts for SEBC, 3 post for SC and 5 
posts for ST candidates. It would be evident from the select list 
that candidates securing less mark than the petitioner have been 
selected whereas the petitioner has not been selected. Learned 
counsel for the petitioner has contended that when it is the 
admitted fact that Opposite Party No.4 securing less mark than 
the Petitioner has been selected, the Petitioner deserves selection 
for the aforesaid post.

Page 13 of 15 
 
8. As per Resolution dated 27.10.2014, the eligibility criteria for 
Classical Teacher (Sanskrit) is “he/she must have obtained bachelors 
degree with Sanskrit as one of the optional/Hons subject from a 
recognized University with minimum 50% marks in aggregate(45% 
for SC/ST/PH/OBC/SEBC Candidates) with sikshya shastri (Sanskrit) 
(a course prescribed by NCTE) from a recognized 
university/institution recognized by NCTEand affiliated to a 
recognized university or Shastri (Sanskrit) with minimum 50% marks 
in aggregate (45%for SC/ST/PH/OBC/SEBC Candidates) from a 
recognized university and Sikshya Shastri (Sanskrit)(a course 
prescribed by NCTE) from a recognized university/institution 
recognized by NCTE and affiliated to a recognized university o r 
Acharya (except Jyotischarya and Ayurvedachrya)or Sahityacharya  
with minimum50% marks in aggregate from a recognized university 
or Bachelor's degree with Sanskrit as one of the optional/Hons s ubject 
from a recognized University with minimum 50% marks in aggreg ate 
(45% for SC/ST/ PH/ OBC/ SEBC Candidates) and M.A in Sanskrit 
with minimum 50% marks in aggregate from a recognized 
University”. 
9. In this regard, the learned counsel for the Opposite Party has 
clarified that pursuant to advertisement, the Petitioner having 
Bachelor Degree with Sanskrit as one of the subject and M.A. in 
Sanskrit applied for the post of Contract Teacher (Sanskrit) in 
respect of Khurda district. After preparation of provisional

Page 14 of 15 
 
merit list, the name of the Petitioner finds place at Sl. No.682 
with remark that “eligible under relaxed norm ”. Thereafter, in 
accordance with time scheduled fixed by the S & ME 
Department, provisional select list for the post of Classical 
Teacher in respect of Khurda district was published. In the said 
list as per advertisement, Unreserved (UR) candidates having 
training qualification have been selected for engagement as 
Contract Teacher (Sanskrit). The allegation of the Petitioner that 
candidates securing less mark than the Petitioner have been 
selected is totally incorrect and false. In this regard, it is 
submitted that as per advertisement, 11 posts were earmarked 
for unreserved candidates. Accordingly, select list of unreserved 
candidates was prepared taking into account the marks 
obtained by the candidates in H.S.C., +2, +3/B.A. with Sanskrit 
or Shastri and Sikhya Shastri. As per the advertisement, all the 
11 posts of Contract Teacher (Sanskrit) have been filled up by 
the selected trained candidates. Therefore, when the Petitioner is 
an untrained candidate, she cannot claim parity to that of the 
trained candidates and she cannot say that she is more 
meritorious than other trained candidates even though she 
possessed more marks in toto than others. When the Petitioner 
having lack of training qualification, she is estopped to claim 
parity/equity with that of the candidates possessing eligibility 
training qualification prescribed in the advertisement. The

Page 15 of 15 
 
Opposite Party No.4 (Rachita Pradhan) is an unreserved trained 
candidate and is eligible as per qualification prescribed in the 
advertisement. 
10.  In light of the aforesaid discussion, this Court hereby rejects the 
prayer of the Petitioner. 
11.  Accordingly, this Writ Petition is disposed of.  
 
 
                     ( Dr. S.K. Panigrahi )  
                                                                                Judge 
 
 
Orissa High Court, Cuttack, 
Dated the 3rd July, 2023/B. Jhankar