CRLMC No.1462 of 2023                                                              Page 1 of 25 
 
  
 
           IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK 
 
CRLMC NO.1462 OF 2023 
 
(Application under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal  
Procedure for fresh investigation or re-investigation by any 
independent agency) 
 
            
            Bandhna Toppo    
                                                   …     Petitioner 
              
     -versus-  
 
State of Orissa  
and others                      …     Opposite Parties 
 
                                                                                                    
                                                                           
        Advocates appeared in the case through hybrid mode: 
 
                For Petitioner:   Mr.Shivsankar Mohanty,          
                                           Advocate  
                                                                         
                                                   -versus-  
              
       For Opp.Parties:  Mr.S.N. Das,       
                                  Addl. Standing Counsel 
     
--------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
              CORAM: 
                         
                             JUSTICE SASHIKANTA MISHRA                         
     
 
 
                JUDGMENT 
                  05.7.2023.

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                             Page 2 of  25 
 
Sashikanta Mishra,J .   The present application filed under Section 
482 of Cr.P.C. is for grant of the following prayer;  
  “It is therefore prayed that this Hon’ble 
Court may graciously be pleased to admit 
the application, call for records and be 
pleased to direct for fresh investigation or 
reinvestigation by any independent agency 
of the State Government or other agency 
including a Central Agency, which has 
acquired specialization in such matters by 
appointing a Superior Rank Officer than 
the accused in Infocity P.S. Case No.336 
dated 24.11.2022 registered under Section 
302 and 34 I.P.C. to secure the ends of 
justice.” 
 2 .   The  facts of the case, briefly stated,  are that on 
28th February, 2022 at about 12 noon, the Petitioner 
received a call from one Birendra Lakra on his mobile 
phone that his son Anand Toppo (deceased)  was un- 
conscious and shifted to Capital Hospital, 
Bhubaneswar in an Ambulance by  one  Manjeet Tete. 
The doctor however, declared him brought dead. 
Suspecting foul play, the Petitioner attempted to lodge 
a complaint before the I.I.C. of Infocity P.S. but the 
same was not accepted on the ground that an F.I.R. 
had already been lodged being Infocity P.S. U.D. Case

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                               Page 3 of  25 
No.14/2022 as a case of suicide. The Petitioner 
submitted a written complaint on 1st April, 2022 before 
the I.I.C. of Infocity P.S. by hand with request to 
register the same and convert the U.D. Case into a 
murder case. The I.I.C. received the same but did not 
give any acknowledgment. On repeated query by the 
Petitioner, it was given out that investigation is in 
progress. Being aggrieved by such inaction of the I.I.C, 
the Petitioner sent the substance of information along 
with his previous complaint in writing to the D.C.P. of 
Police, Bhubaneswar-Cuttack by registered post 
requesting to register the case under Section 302 of 
I.P.C. and to conduct proper investigation. No action 
being taken thereon the Petitioner sent another 
complaint on 17 th May, 2022 by registered post to the 
Commissioner of Police, Bhubaneswar-Cuttack for 
redressal of his grievance.  Since no action was taken 
despite such steps, the petitioner approached this 
Court in CRLMP Nos.2153 and 2154 of 2022.

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                             Page 4 of  25 
 
 3 .   During pendency of the aforementioned case, the 
Infocity Police acknowledged the written complaint of 
the Petitioner and registered the same as P.S. Case No. 
3636 dated 24 th November, 2022. Taking note of such 
facts, a coordinate Bench of this Court disposed of 
CRLMP No.2153/2022, inter alia, with the following 
observations; 
    “xxx  xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx  
“7. The inaction shown by the police is 
deplored. If there is even a shred of 
truth in the allegations made herein, 
such infamy by the police deserves 
strong condemnation. The core mission 
of the police is to protect citizens from 
the undesirable elements of society. But 
if its actions were to leave the 
community more vulnerable to criminal 
victimization, it would undermine the 
popular confidence in law enforcement. 
Looking at the recent surge of cases 
pertaining to delay in registration of 
F.I.Rs, it seems institutional lethargy 
has crept into the system, which is 
unfortunate. 
8. Ergo, the Commissioner of Police, 
Bhubaneswar is directed not to assign 
the concerned policeman to any field 
posting for one year. Also, appropriate 
steps shall be taken at the end of the 
Police Commissioner, Bhubaneswar to 
send the said officer for sensitization 
training at the Biju Pattanaik Police

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                               Page 5 of  25 
Academy, Bhubaneswar for one month. 
The Deputy Commissioner of Police is 
directed to personally monitor the 
investigation of the concerned case 
while keeping all influences at bay and 
submit the Final Report within three 
months from today.” 
   xxx xxx  xxx”. 
 
4. On 15 th December, 2022, the I.O. received 
viscera chemical report of the deceased, which revealed 
the presence of ethyl alcohol and drugs. The I.O. 
obtained opinion of a doctor of AIIMS, Bhubaneswar, 
who was of the view that the injury found on the neck 
of the deceased was ante mortem in nature. Ultimately 
on 7 th February, 2023, final report was submitted 
stating that so far no prima facie evidence is made out 
to be a true case under Section 302 I.P.C. against the 
alleged accused persons beyond all reasonable doubts 
and accordingly, the report was submitted as mistake 
of fact.  
         Feeling aggrieved, the informant-Petitioner has 
filed the present application.

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                             Page 6 of  25 
 
5. Heard Mr. S. Mohanty, learned counsel for the 
Petitioner and Mr. S.N.Das, learned Addl. Standing 
counsel for the State. 
6. Mr. Mohanty argues that one of the accused 
persons namely, Birendra Lakra is a high ranking 
Police Officer being a DSP and therefore, despite clear 
evidence of foul play involved in the death of the 
deceased, final report was submitted as mistake of fact 
deliberately portraying the death as a case of suicide. 
According to Mr. Mohanty, there is ample evidence on 
record to suggest that the Petitioner was administered 
poison along with alcohol which caused his death and 
the accused persons attempted to cover up such fact 
by showing it as a case of suicidal hanging. Moreover, 
the I.I.C. of Infocity Police Station, Samita Mishra, 
against whom this Court had passed certain remarks 
touching upon her impartiality, deliberately tried to 
protect accused Birendra Lakra in connivance with the 
I.O. of the case Arpita Priyadarsini. Summing up his 
arguments Mr. Mohanty submits that a proper and fair

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                               Page 7 of  25 
investigation being essential requirement of criminal 
justice system, this is a fit case where fresh 
investigation should be conducted by any specialized 
agency of the State or Central Governments.  
7. Opposing the contentions of Mr. Mohanty as 
above, Mr. S.N.Das, learned Addl. Standing Counsel 
for the State would submit that the post mortem report 
clearly reveals the case to be one of suicidal hanging. 
The ligature mark present on the neck of the deceased 
is adequate proof of such fact. The chemical 
examination of the viscera revealed presence of alcohol 
and barbiturates, which is consistent with the version 
of the witnesses that the deceased had consumed 
alcohol prior to his death. The opinion of the doctor is 
also very clear that the injuries (ligature mark) could 
be suicidal in nature. Under such circumstances no 
foul play whatsoever can be said to have been involved. 
Mr. Das further argues that even otherwise if the 
Petitioner is aggrieved by submission of final report by 
the I.O., it is open to him to move the court below by

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                             Page 8 of  25 
 
filing protest petition, which can be considered in 
accordance with law, but under the facts, a case for 
further investigation/reinvestigation is not made out at 
all.  
8. Before proceeding to examine the merits of the 
rival submissions noted above, it would be apposite to 
keep in mind the settled position of law as regards the 
power of the High Court to direct further 
investigation/reinvestigation and/or investigation by a 
specialized agency. The case of Devendra Nath Singh 
v. State of Bihar;  reported in (2022) 15 SCR 692: 
(2023) 1 SCC 48: (2023) 1 SCC (Cri) 270 can be 
referred to this in this regard. In the said case, under 
paragraph 12.1, reference was made to an earlier 
decision of the Apex Court i.e., the case of Vinay 
Tyagi v. Irshad Ali, (2013) 5 SCC 762;  wherein it was 
observed as follows; 
“43. At this stage, we may also state another 
well-settled canon of criminal jurisprudence 
that the superior courts have the jurisdiction 
under Section 482 of the Code or even Article 
226 of the Constitution of India to direct

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                               Page 9 of  25 
“further investigation”, “fresh” or “de novo” 
and even “reinvestigation” . “Fresh”, “de 
novo” and “reinvestigation” are synonymous 
expressions and their result in law would be 
the same. The superior courts are even 
vested with the power of transferring 
investigation from one agency to another, 
provided the ends of justice so demand such 
action. Of course, it is also a settled principle 
that this power has to be exercised by the 
superior courts very sparingly and with great 
circumspection. 
44. We have deliberated at some length on 
the issue that the powers of the High Court 
under Section 482 of the Code do not control 
or limit, directly or impliedly, the width of 
the power of the Magistrate under Section 
228 of the Code. Wherever a charge-sheet 
has been submitted to the court, even this 
Court ordinarily would not reopen the 
investigation, especially by entrusting the 
same to a specialised agency. It can safely 
be stated and concluded that in an 
appropriate case, when the Court feels that 
the investigation by the police authorities is 
not in the proper direction and that in order 
to do complete justice and where the facts 
of the case demand, it is always open to the 
Court to hand over the investigation to a 
specialised agency. These principles have 
been reiterated with approval in the 
judgments of this Court in Disha v. State of 
Gujarat [Disha v. State of Gujarat, (2011) 13 
SCC 337 : (2012) 2 SCC (Cri) 628] , Vineet 
Narain v. Union of India [Vineet 
Narain v. Union of India, (1998) 1 SCC 226 : 
1998 SCC (Cri) 307] , Union of 
India v. Sushil Kumar Modi [Union of 
India v. Sushil Kumar Modi, (1996) 6 SCC 
500] and Rubabbuddin Sheikh v. State of

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                             Page 10 of  25 
 
Gujarat [Rubabbuddin Sheikh v. State of 
Gujarat, (2010) 2 SCC 200 : (2010) 2 SCC 
(Cri) 1006] . 
45. The power to order/direct 
“reinvestigation” or “de novo” investigation 
falls in the domain of higher courts, that too 
in exceptional cases. If one examines the 
provisions of the Code, there is no specific 
provision for cancellation of the reports, 
except that the investigating agency can file 
a closure report (where according to the 
investigating agency, no offence is made 
out). Even such a report is subject to 
acceptance by the learned Magistrate who, 
in his wisdom, may or may not accept such 
a report. For valid reasons, the court may, 
by declining to accept such a report, direct 
“further investigation”, or even on the basis 
of the record of the case and the documents 
annexed thereto, summon the accused. 
xxx          xxx              xxx.” 
 
       Again reference was made in Paragraph 12.2 to  
State of Punjab v. C.B.I. State of Punjab v. CBI , 
(2011) 9 SCC 182: (2011) 3 SCC (Cri) 666, wherein it 
was observed as follows; 
“22. Section 482CrPC, however, states that 
nothing in Cr.P.C shall be deemed to limit 
or affect the inherent powers of the High 
Court to make such orders as is necessary 
to give effect to any order under CrPC or to 
prevent the abuse of the process of any 
court or otherwise to secure the ends of 
justice. Thus, the provisions of CrPC do not 
limit or affect the inherent powers of the 
High Court to make such orders as may be

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                               Page 11 of  25 
necessary to give effect to any order of the 
court or to prevent the abuse of any 
process of the court or otherwise to secure 
the ends of justice. The language of sub-
section (8) of Section 173CrPC, therefore, 
cannot limit or affect the inherent powers 
of the High Court to pass an order under 
Section 482CrPC for fresh investigation or 
reinvestigation if the High Court is 
satisfied that such fresh investigation or 
reinvestigation is necessary to secure the 
ends of justice. 
23. We find support for this conclusion in 
the following observations of this Court 
in Mithabhai Pashabhai Patel v. State of 
Gujarat  [Mithabhai Pashabhai 
Patel v. State of Gujarat, (2009)  6 SCC 
332 : (2009) 2 SCC (Cri) 1047] cited by Mr 
Dhavan : (SCC p. 337, paras 13 & 15) 
‘13. It is, however, beyond any cavil 
that “further investigation” and 
“reinvestigation” stand on different footing. 
It may be that in a given situation a 
superior court in exercise of its 
constitutional power, namely, under 
Articles 226 and 32 of the Constitution of 
India could direct a “State” to get an 
offence investigated and/or further 
investigated by a different agency. 
Direction of a reinvestigation, however, 
being forbidden in law, no superior court 
would ordinarily issue such a direction. 
Pasayat, J. in Ramachandran v. R. 
Udhayakumar [Ramachandran v. R. 
Udhayakumar, (2008) 5 SCC 413 : (2008) 
2 SCC (Cri) 631] opined as under : (SCC p. 
415, para 7) 
 
“7. At this juncture it would be 
necessary to take note of Section 173 of

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                             Page 12 of  25 
 
the Code. From a plain reading of the 
above section it is evident that even after 
completion of investigation under sub-
section (2) of Section 173 of the Code, the 
police has right to further investigate under 
sub-section (8), but not fresh investigation 
or reinvestigation.” 
A distinction, therefore, exists between a 
reinvestigation and further investigation. 
*** 
15. The investigating agency and/or a 
court exercise their jurisdiction conferred 
on them only in terms of the provisions of 
the Code. The courts subordinate to the 
High Court even do not have any inherent 
power under Section 482 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure or otherwise. The pre-
cognizance jurisdiction to remand vested in 
the subordinate courts, therefore, must be 
exercised within the four corners of the 
Code.’ 
 
24. It is clear from the aforesaid 
observations of this Court that the 
investigating agency or the court 
subordinate to the High Court exercising 
powers under CrPC have to exercise the 
powers within the four corners of CrPC and 
this would mean that the investigating 
agency may undertake further 
investigation and the subordinate court 
may direct further investigation into the 
case where charge-sheet has been filed 
under sub-section (2) of Section 173CrPC 
and such further investigation will not 
mean fresh investigation or 
reinvestigation. But these limitations in 
sub-section (8) of Section 173CrPC in a 
case where charge-sheet has been filed 
will not apply to the exercise of inherent

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                               Page 13 of  25 
powers of the High Court under Section 
482CrPC for securing the ends of justice.” 
  
                                 [Emphasis supplied] 
 
  After referring to several other decisions on the  
point, the following principles were culled out under 
Paragraph-13:   
“(a) The scheme of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 is to ensure a fair trial 
and that would commence only after a 
fair and just investigation. The ultimate 
aim of every investigation and inquiry, 
whether by the police or by the 
Magistrate, is to ensure that the actual 
perpetrators of the crime are correctly 
booked and the innocents are not 
arraigned to stand trial. 
 (b) The powers of the Magistrate to 
ensure proper investigation in terms of 
Section 156CrPC have been recognised, 
which, in turn, include the power to order 
further investigation in terms of Section 
173(8) CrPC after receiving the report of 
investigation. Whether further 
investigation should or should not be 
ordered is within the discretion of the 
Magistrate, which is to be exercised on 
the facts of each case and in accordance 
with law. 
(c) Even when the basic power to direct 
further investigation in a case where a 
charge-sheet has been filed is with the 
Magistrate, and is to be exercised subject 
to the limitations of Section 173(8) CrPC, 
in an appropriate case, where the High

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                             Page 14 of  25 
 
Court feels that the investigation is not in 
the proper direction and to do complete 
justice where the facts of the case so 
demand, the inherent powers under 
Section 482 CrPC could be exercised to 
direct further investigation or even 
reinvestigation. The provisions of Section 
173(8)CrPC do not limit or affect such 
powers of the High Court to pass an order 
under Section 482 CrPC for further 
investigation or reinvestigation, if the 
High Court is satisfied that such a course 
is necessary to secure the ends of justice. 
(d) Even when the wide powers of the 
High Court in terms of Section 482CrPC 
are recognised for ordering further 
investigation or reinvestigation, such 
powers are to be exercised sparingly, 
with circumspection, and in exceptional 
cases. 
                        xxx   xxx    xxx    xxx    xxx.” 
                                 [Emphasis supplied] 
 
     The law being as referred to in the preceding 
paragraphs, the contentions urged by the parties shall 
now be considered.  
9.  From the case diary containing the statements of 
several persons including Birendra Lakra and Manjeet 
Tete, it appears that the deceased used to stay with 
Manjeet Tete in a Flat under Infocity Police Station, 
Bhubaneswar and Birendra Lakra used to visit them at

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                               Page 15 of  25 
times. The Petitioner appears to have had a 
relationship with said Manjeet Tete, which he wanted 
to continue even after his marriage to another girl in 
Jharsuguda. The deceased appears to have arrived in 
Bhubaneswar in the morning of 28th February, 2022 at 
about 7.30.A.M. According to the statement of  Manjeet 
Tete recorded under Section 164 of Cr.P.C., the 
deceased requested her to continue with the 
relationship despite his marriage to which she refused. 
He is also said to have forcibly pulled the hand of 
Manjeet and started drinking alcohol and kept on 
reiterating his request for continuance of the 
relationship. Manjeet was however, not agreeable and 
packed her suitcase with intent of leaving the flat.  She 
went to the bathroom taking her ear phones with her 
but before that the deceased asked her for the saree 
that he had gifted her earlier. Manjeet is said to have 
asked him to search for the saree in the house. When 
Manjeet returned from the bathroom 10 to 15 minutes 
later, she found the deceased hanging from the ceiling 
fan by means of the gifted blue colour saree with his

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                             Page 16 of  25 
 
knees being 2” to 3” above t he floor. Manjeet brought 
the deceased down and opened the knot of the saree 
and checked his pulse. There being no response she 
attempted mouth to mouth respiration which did not 
yield any result. She then called Birendra Lakra, who 
was in the other room. Birendra Lakra also  checked 
the deceased and thereafter both of them called  the 
Ambulance and Manjeet took the deceased to Capital 
Hospital where he was declared  brought dead.  
10. Birendra Lakra, in his statement recorded under 
Section 161 of Cr.P.C. more or less stated the same 
thing and specifically stated that he was playing a 
game on his mobile phone being connected with ear 
phones. He however, states that Manjeet had taken the 
deceased to Capital Hospital on an ambulance and he 
reached there later by which time the deceased had 
already been declared dead. He also claims to have 
paid Rs.60,000/- to the father of the deceased (present 
Petitioner) to defray the expenses of carrying the dead 
body. Several other witnesses have been examined, but

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                               Page 17 of  25 
all of them are post occurrence witnesses and have no 
direct knowledge about the incident. If the statements 
of Manjeet and Birendra Lakra are read objectively, it 
would show certain palpable incongruities and 
significant aspects that which have not been 
considered by the I.O. namely; 
(i) The deceased was found hanging from 
the ceiling fan with his knees 2 ” to 3” 
above the floor which is strange since 
nothing has been said as to what was 
the position of his feet. This would 
obviously imply that the lower part of his 
leg (below the knees) must have been 
folded backwards with his feet touching  
the ground. 
  
(ii) In such background, the statement 
of Manjeet that having seen the deceased 
hanging from the ceiling fan she herself 
brought him down and opened the noose 
of the saree seems difficult to believe.   
(iii) The statement of Manjeet that she 
attempted mouth to mouth respiration 
and thereafter called Birendra Lakra 
militates against the natural reaction

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                             Page 18 of  25 
 
expected of a young girl on witnessing 
such a sight. In ordinary course, she 
should have shouted for help or called 
Birendra Lakra, who was in the adjacent 
room.  
(iv) The statements of both Manjeet and 
Birendra Lakra that they had used ear 
phones at the relevant time appear to 
have been made out of context. 
Moreover, while Birendra Lakra himself 
stated that he was playing a game on his 
mobile phone, the I.O. mentioned in the 
charge sheet that he was listening to 
music on his IPod. 
(v) Birendra Lakra admits that due to  
family disturbances, he had stayed in 
the said Flat for 20 days with permission 
of Anand Toppo (deceased) and  also  
used to visit the Flat even in the absence 
of Anand. Implication of such admission 
has not been considered. 
(vi) The post mortem report clearly 
shows the presence of a ligature mark on 
the neck of the deceased. The chemical 
examination report of the viscera shows

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                               Page 19 of  25 
the presence of alcohol and barbiturate. 
Implication of all these have not been 
properly  considered.  
(vii)    The Additional Professor, 
Department of Forensic Medicine 
Toxicology, AIIMS, Bhubaneswar 
specifically opined as follows; 
“Both alcohol and barbiturate are 
habit forming drugs.  Very often 
these drugs are used for 
recreational liabilities.  
Combination of both is likely fatal 
to cause depression and death.  
Basing on the chemical analysis 
report, considering the post mortem 
findings and the subsequent 
answer to the queries, the cause of 
death was ante mortem hanging.  I 
am of the opinion that the deceased 
had consumed intentionally both 
the compound prior to death”.   
         It is surprising as to how the doctor 
could positively opine that the deceased had 
intentionally consumed both the compounds.

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                             Page 20 of  25 
 
           Nevertheless, in his final opinion the doctor 
states as follows; 
“After perusing all the documents 
mentioned above, I am of the considered 
opinion that the cause of death was ante 
mortem hanging and its complication. 
However, the victim consumed alcohol 
and barbiturate before his death.”  
 
    It is thus seen that the doctor has not given a 
conclusive opinion, rather his opinion suggests that 
the death could be either due to ante mortem  
hanging or the result of consumption of alcohol with 
barbiturate. 
11. I have perused the case diary carefully.   I do not 
find anything therein to even remotely suggest that 
investigation was directed to the aforementioned 
aspects. Of course, I would hasten to add that it is not 
the intention of this Court to impute any culpability to  
any person but only to highlight that investigation 
should have been directed towards the aspects referred 
above. It must be kept in mind that death of a human 
being has occurred. There is an allegation of foul play. 
The matter should therefore, have been investigated

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                               Page 21 of  25 
thoroughly touching all possible angles  keeping in 
view the allegations. In fact, even the evidence collected 
by the I.O. is not such as would completely rule out 
foul play. There are glaring gaps in the investigation as 
discussed hereinabove, for which, it cannot be so 
easily concluded that the death of the deceased was 
certainly due to suicidal hanging and nothing else.  
12. Proper and fair investigation is sine qua non of  
criminal jurisprudence. The very purpose of 
investigation is to find out the truth. But if relevant 
aspects have been ignored/over looked by the 
investigating agency, it cannot be said that there was 
fair and proper investigation. As observed by the Apex 
Court in  Vinay Tyagi (supra) is as follows;   
“what ultimately is the aim or significance 
of the expression “fair and proper 
investigation” in criminal jurisprudence? It 
has a twin purpose: Firstly, the 
investigation must be unbiased, honest, 
just and in accordance with law; 
secondly, the entire emphasis on a fair 
investigation has to be to bring out the 
truth of the case before the court of 
competent jurisdiction. Once these twin 
paradigms of fair investigation are

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                             Page 22 of  25 
 
satisfied, there will be the least 
requirement for the court of law to 
interfere with the investigation, much less 
quash the same, or transfer it to another 
agency. Bringing out the truth by fair and 
investigative means in accordance with 
law would essentially repel the very basis 
of an unfair, tainted investigation or cases 
of false implication. Thus, it is inevitable 
for a court of law to pass a specific order 
as to the fate of the investigation, which 
in its opinion is unfair, tainted and in 
violation of the settled principles of 
investigative canons.” 
  From the apparent gaps and incongruities as 
has been narrated earlier, this Court is left with little 
doubt that investigation in the present case cannot be 
said to have been conducted properly and that several 
areas still remain to be investigated.  
13. Now whether direction should be for further 
investigation or fresh/reinvestigation is the question. 
As has already been referred to hereinbefore, this 
Court has power to direct both. In the instant case, the 
entire investigation has proceeded on the premise of 
suicide.  All efforts of the investigating officer appear to 
have been made in this background. Under such 
circumstances, further investigation would be an

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                               Page 23 of  25 
exercise to only take forward what has already been 
investigated. It would obviously not meet the 
requirement of justice that the case demands. On the 
contrary, if the matter is reinvestigated in all aspects, 
including those that have hitherto not been looked at 
can also be taken into consideration. Since the case 
involves death of a human being with the allegation of 
foul play, which this Court, prima facie finds         
acceptable, it is a fit case to direct reinvestigation. 
14. The question that now arises is, by which agency 
should the reinvestigation be conducted. It is the 
settled position of law that the High Court in exercise 
of its power under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. can direct 
investigation to be conducted by an 
independent/specialized agency in appropriate cases. 
In the present case, there is allegation that the I.I.C.  of 
Infocity P.S. collaborated with the I.O. to ensure 
submission of final report as mistake of  fact. This 
Court would not like to comment on the above aspect 
except for noting the fact that the concerned I.I.C. has

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                             Page 24 of  25 
 
already been hauled up by a coordinate bench of this 
Court for her gross inaction in acting upon the 
complaint submitted by the Petitioner for a long time. 
It is also borne out from the case record that Birendra 
Lakra is a high ranking Police Officer belonging to the 
grade of Deputy Superintendent (DSP). The Petitioner ’s 
allegation that the investigation was biased or in any 
case not impartial appears to be reasonable in the 
facts and circumstances of the case. Therefore, 
directing the same agency to reinvestigate would not be 
proper. Rather for the ends of justice, it would be 
proper for an independent agency like the C.I.D. (Crime 
Branch) to do so.    
15. For the foregoing reasons therefore, the CRLMC 
is allowed. This Court directs that the case shall be 
reinvestigated by the C.I.D. (Crime Branch). Having 
regard to the fact that one of the accused persons  is 
himself  a Senior Police Officer in the rank of Deputy 
Superintendent of Police, it would be proper if the 
investigation is conducted by an Officer of the higher

CRLMC No.1462  of 2023                                                               Page 25 of  25 
grade. This Court therefore, directs the Addl. Director 
General (Crime Branch) to entrust the investigation to 
a Senior Officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector 
General of Police who shall reinvestigate the matter 
from all angles and submit report to the concerned 
Court accordingly. The previous I.O. is directed to 
transmit the entire case diary and all other 
records/documents collected during investigation to 
the C.I.D. (Crime Branch) forthwith.                                       
                                                                     …………….…….……….. 
            ( Sashikanta Mishra)             
                                                                             Judge 
 
 
 
Ashok Kumar Behera