Page 1 of 24 
 
 
 IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK 
W.P.(C) No.18225 of 2022  
 
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the 
Constitution of India. 
      
Reena Nayak  ….         Petitioner  
-versus- 
State of Odisha and Ors.  …. Opposite Parties 
 
 
    Advocates appeared in the case through Hybrid Mode: 
For Petitioner  : Mr. Soumendra Pattanaik, Adv. 
Mr. A.K. Panigrahi, Adv. 
Mr. P.K. Pasayat, Adv.  
 
For Opposite Parties. : Mr. Ch. Satyajit Mishra, AGA 
(for O.Ps.1 & 2) 
Mr. P.K. Parhi, DSGI 
(for O.P.3) 
Mr. B. Routray, Sr. Adv.  
(for O.P.4) 
                    
    
 
     CORAM:                         
                        Dr. JUSTICE S.K. PANIGRAHI  
     
 
 
DATE OF HEARING:-28.02.2023 
DATE OF JUDGMENT: -03.07.2023 
 
Dr. S.K. Panigrahi, J. 
1. In this Writ Petition, the Petitioner has challenged the action of 
Opposite Party No.1/ Principal Secretary, Food, Supplies and 
Consumer Welfare Department, Government of Odisha, 
Bhubaneswar in appointing the Opposite Party No.4 (Miss

Page 2 of 24 
 
Sudhira Laxmi Pattnaik) as a Member, State Consumer Disputes 
Redressal Commission, Odisha, Cuttack in contravention of 
Rule 3(2)(b), 10 and other provision of Consumer Protection 
(Qualification for appointment, method of recruitment, 
Procedure of appointment, term of office, resignation and 
removal of the President and Members of State Commission and 
District Commission) Rules, 2020 (hereinafter referred to as “the 
Rules” for brevity) and the scrutiny committee without rejecting 
the applications of Opposite Party Nos.4 and 5 allowed them to 
appear in the written test as well as viva-voce ignoring the 
Petitioner. She has also prayed for quashing the appointment 
order dated 03.03.2022 issued in favour of the Opposite Party 
No.4 as a Member, State Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commission, Odisha, Cuttack by the Opposite Party No.2/ 
DCA-cum-Joint Secretary, Food, Supplies and Consumer 
Welfare Department, Government of Odisha, Bhubaneswar.  
I. FACTS OF THE CASE: 
2. The fact of the case, in brief, is that the Opposite Party No.1/ 
Government of Odisha, Food, Supplies & Consumer Welfare 
Department published an Advertisement in daily Newspaper 
i.e. the Samaj, the Sambada, the Prameya and the New Indian 
Express on 23.08.2021 to fill up 4 post of Members in the State

Page 3 of 24 
 
Commission, Odisha, Cuttack and President and Member of 
different District Commissions. 
3. In pursuance of the said Advertisement dated 23.08.2021, the 
Petitioner along with other candidates had applied for the post 
of Member, State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, 
Odisha, Cuttack and appeared in the written examination held 
on 28.11.2021. The petitioner had cleared the written 
examination for the post of Member, State Consumer Disputes 
Redressal Commission and received intimation letter dated 
25.01.2022 through e-mail and appeared in the interview 
conducted by Selection Committee held on 03.02.2022 at Odisha 
Judicial Academy Cuttack. 
4. It is the case of the Petitioner that the Opposite Party Nos.4 and 
5 were not eligible to appear in the written test and interview 
and their applications should have been rejected at the stage of 
scrutiny. However, the Opposite Party No.1 allowed them to 
appear in the written test as well as in the interview. 
5. Pursuant to Clause-4A(i)(b) of the said long advertisement 
dated 23.08.2021, the Petitioner along with the Opposite Party 
Nos.4 and 5 applied for the post of Member, State Consumer 
Disputes Redressal Commission, Odisha, Cuttack. However, the 
Scrutiny Committee without rejecting the applications of the 
Opposite Party Nos.4 and 5 allowed them to appear in the 
written test as well as in the viva- voce and appointed the

Page 4 of 24 
 
Opposite Party No.4 ignoring the Petitioner for said post. 
Hence, she is constrained to approach this Court.  
II. SUBMISSIONS ADVANCED ON BEHALF OF THE 
PETITIONER: 
6. Learned counsel for the Petitioner submitted that pursuant to 
the Advertisement dated 23.08.2021, the Petitioner had applied 
for said post and appeared in the written examination. She 
cleared the written test and on receipt of intimation letter dated 
25.01.2022 through e-mail appeared in the viva-voce test. 
However, the Opposite Party No.1 ignoring the Petitioner 
selected/appointed the Opposite Party No.4 as a Member, State 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Odisha, Cuttack  in 
contravention of Rule 3(2)(b) and 10 of the Rules. Rule-3(2)(b) of 
the said Rule provides as follows: 
“a candidate must possesses bachelor's degree 
from a recognised university and is a person of 
ability, integrity and has special knowledge and 
professional knowledge and experience of not less 
than twenty years in consumer affairs, law, public 
affairs, administration, economics, commerce, 
industry affairs, law, public affairs, 
administration, economics, commerce, industry, 
finance, management, engineering, technology, 
public health or medicine”. 
7. In view of the above provision of the Rules, the Opposite Party 
No.4 does not qualify the criteria laid down for appointment of 
the said post. Therefore, her application should have been

Page 5 of 24 
 
rejected at the threshold of scrutiny stage. However, the 
selection committee mechanically scrutinized the candidature of 
the Opposite Party No.4 and selected her for the said post and 
issued the appointment letter. 
8. The term of office of the President and Members has been 
elaborately mentioned under Rule-10 of the said Rules. Rule-10 
of the said Rules provides as follows:  
 “Terms of Office of President or Member -The 
president and every member of the State 
Commission and the District Commission shall 
hold office for a term of four years or up to the age 
of sixty five years whichever is earlier and shall be 
eligible for reappointment for another term of four 
years subject to the age limit of sixty five years 
and such reappointment is made on the basis of 
recommendation of Selection Committee.” 
9.  In view of the above provision of the Rules, the Opposite 
Party No.4 is also not eligible to be appointed as a Member of 
State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Odisha 
because she has already appointed for two terms as Member 
of District Consumer Forum, Kandhamal for the period from 
15.12.2010 to 14.12.2015 and from 16.4.2016 to 15.4.2021. 
Similarly, the Opposite Party No.5 is also not eligible to be 
selected for written test and viva-voce for the said post 
because she has already appointed for two terms as Member 
of District Consumer Forum, Sundargarh and Bhubaneswar 
for the period from 15.12.2099 to 14.01.2004 and from

Page 6 of 24 
 
08.02.2005 to 30.11.2009 respectively. However, they have 
been allowed to appear in the written test and viva-voce test 
in contravention of the mandate of Rule-10 of the Rules. 
Therefore, their applications should have been rejected at the 
threshold of scrutiny stage.  
10.  The Petitioner put forth the recital of Section-27 of the 
Consumer Protection Act, 2019 which encapsulates the 
meaning of Member appearing in Rule-10 of said Rules. A 
conjoint reading of the aforesaid two provisions i.e. Section-27 
of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 and Rule-10 of the Rules 
clearly hinges that member in anyone in District or State 
Commission. There is no distinction between the two 
Commission i.e. District Commission or State Commission. 
Therefore, the person who holds the office of member for one 
term not more than two terms and after expiry of one term 
subsequent term is by way of reappointment subject to 
condition of rule which inhibits the candidate not to be 
appointed for more than twice. Thus, the Opposite Party No.4 
is not eligible to hold the said post which would amount to 
holding office of Member for 3 rd term and is not at all 
permissible as per statute. 
11.  Learned counsel for the Petitioner further submitted that 
from the forgoing reasons the Opposite Party No.4 is also not 
eligible for not possessing the qualification for appointment to

Page 7 of 24 
 
the post of Member of State Commission. In this regard, the 
Petitioner obtained the relevant document through R.T.I and 
perusal of the same goes to show that the Opposite Party No.4 
has obtained the license from the Orissa State Bar Counsel in 
the year 2006 bearing Enrollment No-0-1482/2006 and soon 
thereafter for about 4 years, she was selected as Member of 
District Consumer Redressal Forum, Kandhamal and served 
the said post from 2010 to 2016. Thus, she had not possessed 
10 years professional experience in the field of law when she 
was first selected as Member of District Consumer Redressal 
Forum, Kandhamal as per Section-10(b) of Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986. The second term is shortfall of 10 years 
as well as third term is also shortfall of 20 years of experience 
mandated by Rule 3(2)(b) of the Rules. Therefore, holding of 
office by Opposite Party No.4 from very inception till date. It 
is further submitted that it is not only false but also clear 
manifestation of illegalities actuated by the authorities. 
12. It was further submitted that although the Opposite Party 
No.4 was appointed as Member of District Forum, 
Kandhamal from 2010 to 2015 and 2016 to 2021 and as a 
Member of State Commission from 2021 to till date without 
suspending her license, but she is still practicing as an 
Advocate in Ganjam Bar which is in violation of law as per 
the Consumer Protection Act and Rules framed thereunder. A

Page 8 of 24 
 
person who has been appointed as full time Member of the 
District Consumer Commission and State Consumer 
Commission cannot continue his/her practice as an Advocate 
during the relevant period. However, the Opposite Party No.4 
is still continuing her practice as a Lawyer. 
13.  It was also submitted that it clearly reveals from the photo 
copy of information received under RTI Act that Opposite 
Party No.4 is still practicing as an Advocate. She has 
suppressed the said facts to the State Government and 
violated the provision of law. So, her conduct is doubtful. 
Therefore, necessary action be taken against the Opposite 
Party No.4 as she is liable to be removed from her service for 
misconduct and suppression of facts. The person holding a 
Government post/Public Office as a Member of State 
Consumer Commission at a time cannot practice as an 
Advocate in any court of law. 
14.  It was submitted that the Opposite Party No.4 in her counter 
affidavit is silent about the possession of experience of 20 
years as per Rule 3(2)(b) of said Rules. She has only stated that 
she has requisite qualification and experience. However, the 
learned Senior Counsel for the Opposite Party No.4 at the 
time of argument submitted that the experience of the 
Opposite Party No.4 is coming under Rule-3(2)(a) of said Rule 
which is false because the Opposite Party No.4 had appointed

Page 9 of 24 
 
as Member of District Consumer Redresal Forum, 
Kandhamal. Neither was she holding the Office as Presiding 
Officer of any Court nor Tribunal or equivalent to the 
Tribunal. Thus, she is not falling under Rule 3(2) (a) of the 
said Rules. Learned counsel for the Petitioner also placed 
reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in the cases of 
Yogeeta Chandra v. The State of Uttar Pradesh and Anr. 1 and 
Satish Chandra Yadav v. Union of India and others 2 to 
buttress his submissions.  
 
III. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE OPP. PARTY NOS.1 
& 2: 
15.  Learned counsel for the Opposite Party Nos.1 and 2/ Stated 
submitted that the Opposite Party Nos.4 and 5 were found 
eligible by the Scrutiny Committee, as a result of which, 
Opposite Party No.1 allowed them to appear in the written test 
as well as in the interview. Therefore, the action taken thereon 
cannot be construed as illegal and arbitrary. 
16.  He further submitted that the Petitioner has misinterpreted the 
provisions of Rules which may be summarized herein below: 
i. Nowhere, it has been mentioned that one has to serve 
one term as Member (W) in the State Commission to be 
selected for the 2 nd term. The Petitioner has not served 
                                                 
1( Decided on 20th Feb., 2023 in Special Leave Petition (Civil) Nos. 4860-4861/2019) 
2 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1300

Page 10 of 24 
 
even one term in the State Commission prior to appear 
in the written test and interview. 
ii. In sub-para-2 of para-9 of the Writ Petition, the 
Petitioner has misinterpreted and misconstrued the 
provisions under the Rules that professional 
experience of 20 years lacks is lacking on the part of the 
Opposite Party Nos.4 and 5. Under sub-rule (2) of Rule 
3 of the Consumer Protection (Qualification for 
appointment, method of recruitment, procedure of 
appointment, term of office, resignation and removal 
of the President and members of the State Commission 
and District Commission) Rules, 2020 it has been 
envisaged that an applicant has to be a bachelor's 
degree from a recognised university and is a person of 
ability, integrity and standing, and has special 
knowledge and professional experience of not less than 
twenty years in consumer affairs, law, public affairs, 
administration, economics, commerce, industry, 
finance, management, engineering, technology, public 
health or medicine. In the instant case, both the 
Opposite Party Nos.4 and 5 have special knowledge 
and professional experience, for which, the Scrutiny 
Committee has found them eligible for the post of

Page 11 of 24 
 
Member (W) in State Commission and allowed them to 
appear in the written test as well as the interview. 
iii. The Opposite Party Nos.4 and 5 have not applied for 
3rd term of the Member (W) in State Commission which 
is in contravention of Rules. They have not served even 
a single term in State Commission prior to making 
application for the post. 
17.  It was further submitted that the Opposite Parties/ State have 
never made any illegalities in selecting the Opposite Party No.4 
for the post of Member(W) in State Commission. Nowhere, the 
mandate of the provisions made under sub-rule 2 (b) of Rule 3 
and Rule 10 of the Consumer Protection (Qualification for 
appointment, method of recruitment, procedure of 
appointment, term of office, resignation and removal of the 
President and members of the State Commission and District 
Commission) Rules, 2020 have been ignored in selecting the 
Opposite Party No.4 for the post of Member (W) in State 
Commission. 
18.  It was also submitted that the Petitioner has tried a lot to 
dilute the provision made under Rule 10 of the Consumer 
Protection (Qualification for appointment, method of 
recruitment, procedure of appointment, term of office, 
resignation and removal of the President and members of the 
State Commission and District Commission) Rules, 2020. The

Page 12 of 24 
 
provisions made under Rule 10 of the aforesaid Rules is very 
clear which has been extracted below. 
“The President and every member of the State 
Commission and the District Commission shall 
hold office for a term of four years or up to the age 
of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier and shall 
be eligible for reappointment for another term of 
four years subject to the age limit of sixty five 
years, and such reappointment is made on the 
basis of the recommendation of the Selection 
Committee.” 
In the Rule, it has been clarified that one can serve two terms 
in the State Commission and two terms in the District 
Commission as State Commission is a different entity from 
that of District Commission and both the Commissions cannot 
be tagged into one. Moreover, State Commission is the 
Appellate Authority in respect of all District Commissions, for 
which, its status cannot be at par with District Commissions. 
That apart, the provisions for qualification, experience and 
service conditions emoluments etc. of State Commission is 
different from that of District Commission. Thus, a person 
serving two terms in District Commissions cannot be debarred 
from serving in State Commission. 
19.  He further submitted that the Opposite Party Nos.4 and 5 
being found eligible in all respects by the Scrutiny Committee 
duly constituted on the recommendation of Selection

Page 13 of 24 
 
Committee, allowed to appear in the written test as well as 
interview as per the procedure laid down under the Rules. 
20.  It was submitted that the Opposite Party No.4 though served 
two terms in District Commission has not served even a single 
term as Member (W) in State Commission and, therefore, 
found suitable for the said post as per the Rules. 
21. The Opposite Party No.4 has not been selected as Member (W) 
for the 3 rd term in District Commission as she has served two 
terms in District Commission and appointed for 1 st term in the 
State Commission. Hence, it cannot be said that the Opposite 
Party No.4 has been selected for 3 rd term. The allegation by the 
Petitioner is misconstrued and bereft of any logic.  
22.  The Scrutiny Committee after verifying all the records 
pertaining to the qualification and experience of the Opposite 
Party No.4 recommended to appear in the written 
examination. Thus, the Opposite Party No.4 possess required 
qualification and experience as prescribed under the Rules. 
23.  It was also submitted that the Petitioner has tried a lot to drag 
the Opposite Party No.5 into the conflict who has been placed 
at Serial No.10 of the merit list after the interview taken by the 
Selection Committee but could not succeed to join in the post. 
The petitioner who has appeared in the written test as well as 
interview has also been placed at Serial No.12 in the merit list.

Page 14 of 24 
 
24.  It was submitted that under Rule-6 of the Consumer 
Protection (Qualification for appointment, method of 
recruitment, procedure of appointment, term of office, 
resignation and removal of the President and members of the 
State Commission and District Commission) Rules, 2020, a 
Selection Committee has been constituted under the 
Chairmanship of a sitting Judge of Orissa High Court and on 
the advice of such Selection Committee, a Scrutiny Committee 
with senior level officers including senior Judicial Officer has 
scrutinized the applications so received for the post of 
Member (W) in State Commission. Therefore, the allegation 
made by the Petitioner that illegality and arbitrary has been 
made is false and fabricated and cannot be sustainable. 
25.  It was also submitted that the Opposite Party Nos.4 and 5 and 
the Petitioner after the written test as well as interview which 
was conducted under the direct supervision of the Selection 
Committee chaired by a Sitting Judge of Orissa High Court 
were empanelled at Serial No.03, 10 and 12 respectively. The 
Petitioner has tried to make allegation against the entire 
selection process is ill-intentioned and baseless. Therefore, this 
Court should dismiss the Writ Petition with cost.

Page 15 of 24 
 
IV. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE OPPOSITE PARTY 
NO.3: 
26.  Learned counsel for the Opposite Party No.3 submitted that the 
Rule-10 of the Rules provides as under:  
“Term of office of President or Member -(1) 
The President of the State Commission shall hold 
office for a term of four years or upto the age of 
sixty-seven years, whichever is earlier and shall be 
eligible for reappointment for another term of four 
years subject to the age limit of sixty-seven years, 
and such reappointment shall be made on the 
basis of the recommendation of the Selection 
Committee.  
(2) Every member of the State Commission and 
the President and every member of the District 
Commission shall hold office for a term of four 
years or upto the age of sixty-five years, 
whichever is earlier and shall be eligible for 
reappointment for another term of four years 
subject to the age limit of sixty-five years, and 
such reappointment shall be made on the basis of 
the recommendation of the Selection Committee.” 
 
27. From examination of the Petition, it appears that the Opposite 
Party No. 4 has been appointed for the first term in the State 
Commission, Odisha as Member (Woman). Earlier she had 
worked for two terms in the District Commission, Kandhamal in 
Odisha. The fact that she worked for earlier two terms in the 
District Commission, Kandhamal does not debar her for 
appointment to the post of Member (Woman) in State Consumer

Page 16 of 24 
 
Disputes Redressal Commission, Odisha, in terms of provision 
of the aforesaid Rules. Prior to her appointment to the post of 
Member (Woman) in the State Commission, Odisha, the 
Opposite Party No. 4 held the post of Member, District Forum, 
Kandhamal for two terms. The appointments were made by the 
State Government under the provisions of the Rules framed 
under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. The instant 
appointment to the post of Member (Woman) in the State 
Commission was made under the provisions of the Consumer 
Protection (Qualification for appointment, method of 
recruitment Procedure of appointment, term of office, 
resignation and removal of the President and Members of State 
Commission and District Commission) Rules, 2020 framed 
under the provision of the Consumer Protection Act. 2019. The 
appointments made by the State Government under the 
provision of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 cannot be 
correlated to this case. As such, her appointment as Member 
(Woman) in the State Commission is not in violation of Rule 10 
of the aforesaid rules. In the instant case, the Opposite Party No. 
4 has been appointed as Member (Woman) in the State 
Commission for the first term.  
28. The fact of working for two terms earlier as Member in some 
other District Consumer Commission does not debar the 
Opposite Party No. 4 to be appointed for the first time in the

Page 17 of 24 
 
State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission as Member 
(Woman). As regards lack of qualifications etc., in respect of the 
Opposite Party No. 5, it is for the State Government to reply. 
29.  It was submitted here that the Opposite Party No. 4 has been 
appointed as Member (W) in the State Commission for the first 
time, which is in order insofar as the provision of Rule-10 of the 
Rules is concerned. As regards the professional experience and 
special knowledge, it is for the State Government to reply. They 
have applied for the first term in the State Commission and not 
for the third term. 
30.  As regards to violation of Rule 3 and Sub-Rule 3(b), it is for the 
State Government to reply. However, the provision of Rule-10 of 
the Rules has not been violated in appointing the Opposite Party 
no.4 for the first time in the State Commission as Member (W) 
by the Opposite Party No.2. 
31.  In fact, Rule-10 of the Rules has been misinterpreted. District 
Commission Kandhamal and State Commission, Odisha are two 
different types of quasi-judicial bodies and separate 
establishments. The terms of appointment made are different 
under two different Acts i.e. Consumer Protection Act, 1986 and 
Consumer Protection Act, 2019. It is wrong to say that 
appointment of the Opposite Party No.4 as Member (W) in the 
State Commission is the third term of appointment.

Page 18 of 24 
 
32.  The Opposite party No.5 worked for two terms in District 
Forum, Sudargarh and Bhubaneswar does not debar her to be 
called for interview for the post of Member (W) in the State 
Commission. In such view of the matter, it was submitted that 
this Court may be pleased to dismiss the Writ Petition as the 
same is devoid of any merits. 
V. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE OPPOSITE PARTY 
NO.4: 
33.  Learned Senior Counsel for the Opposite Party No.4 submitted 
that the Petitioner in the present Writ Petition has challenged 
the very action of the Opposite Party No.1 in appointing the 
Opposite Party No.4 as Women member of State Consumer 
Disputes Redressal Commission, Odisha, Cuttack in 
contravention of Rule 3(b) and 10 of Consumer Protection 
(Qualification for appointment, method of recruitment, 
Procedure of appointment, term of office, resignation and 
removal of the President and Members of State Commission & 
District Commission) Rules, 2020. 
34.  He submitted that the main contention of the Petitioner is that 
the Opposite Party no.4 has not satisfied the requisite 
qualification and experience in terms of Rule 3 (2) (b) of the 
Rules as she does not possess any special knowledge and 
professional experience of twenty years as has been prescribed 
under the said Rules. However, the fact remains the present

Page 19 of 24 
 
Opposite Party No.4 not only possess the bachelor degree in 
B.Sc but she has also done her L.LB from Berhampur University 
and joined as Lawyer in the Bar of Ganjam Bar association. So 
far as special knowledge and professional experience of not less 
than twenty years is concerned, the present Opposite Party No.4 
has remained as Member of District Consumer Forum for two 
terms (10 years) and that being coupled with the her experience 
as Lawyer and more than 10 years social work in public affairs. 
Therefore, her total special knowledge and professional 
experience is about 24 years which is more than twenty years as 
has been prescribed under the Rules. The work experience 
certificates issued in favour of the Opposite Party No.4 is 
appended herewith as Appendix-I and the copy of orders 
depicting appointment of the Opposite Party No.4 as Member 
for two terms in District Consumer Forum is appended 
herewith as Appendix-II which were provided by the Opposite 
Party No.4 while submitting her application. The same has been 
considered by the Scrutiny Committee and only after detailed 
scrutiny she was allowed to appear in the written and Viva-
Voce test and, thereafter, she was found eligible to be appointed 
as Member by the Selection Committee. The said fact has also 
been reiterated in the Counter-affidavit filed by the State 
Government.

Page 20 of 24 
 
35.  It was also submitted that the second bone of contention raised 
by the Petitioner against the Opposite Party No.4 was that as she 
has served two terms as Member in District Consumer Disputes 
Redressal Commission, Kandhamal, she is not eligible to be 
appointed as Women member of State Consumer Disputes 
Redressal Commission, Odisha in contravention to Rule-10 of 
the Rules, as she has already served two terms in District 
Forum. To that effect, it was submitted that from the bare 
perusal of Rule-10 of the Rules, it is clear that there is no specific 
bar for appointment of any member who has served as Member 
in any District Forum for two terms cannot be appointed as a 
Member in State Consumer Commission. Further, the present 
Opposite Party No.4 has never been reappointed as Member in 
State Consumer Commission. Rather, in terms of Rule-6 of the 
Rules, the present Opposite Party No.4 appeared in written 
examination along with other candidates and after being 
declared meritorious in written examination she was allowed to 
appear in Viva-Voce. Thereafter, keeping in view her marks 
secured in written examination as well as viva voce, she was 
selected by the Selection Committee headed by the sitting Judge 
of this Court as Member (Woman) of the State Commission. 
VI. COURT’S REASONING AND ANALYSIS: 
36.  Heard learned counsel for the Parties. Perused the Writ 
Petition and all the documents available on records.

Page 21 of 24 
 
37.  It is apparent from the records that the Opposite Party No.4 
has not been selected as Member (W) for the 3 rd term in 
District Commission as she has served two terms in District 
Commission and appointed for the 1 st term in the State 
Commission. Under the Rule-10, there is no specific bar for 
appointment of any member who has served as Member in 
any District Forum for two terms as a Member in State 
Consumer Commission. Moreover, the Scrutiny Committee 
after verifying all the records pertaining to the qualification 
and experience of the Opposite Party No.4, have 
recommended to appear for the written examination. Thus, the 
Opposite Party No.4 possesses the required qualification and 
experience as provided under the Rules. So far as the other 
qualification and experience of the Opposite Party No.4 is 
concerned, as prescribed under Rule 3 (2) (b) of the Rules, the 
Opposite Party No.4 possesses the bachelor degree in B.Sc and 
L.LB from Berhampur University and joined as Lawyer in 
Ganjam Bar Association. So far as special knowledge and 
professional experience of not less than twenty years is 
concerned, the present Opposite Party No.4 has served as 
Member of District Consumer Forum for two terms (10 years) 
and coupled with her experience as Lawyer and more than 10 
years social work in public affairs. Therefore, her total special 
knowledge and professional experience is about 24 years

Page 22 of 24 
 
which is more than twenty years as has been prescribed under 
the Rules. The said facts are substantiated from the work 
experience certificates issued in favour of the Opposite Party 
No.4 and the copy of orders depicting appointment of the 
Opposite Party No.4 as Member for two terms in District 
Consumer Forum. The same has been considered by the 
Scrutiny Committee and only after that she was allowed to 
appear in the written and Viva-Voce test and, thereafter, she 
was found eligible to be appointed as Member by the Selection 
Committee. The same fact has also been reiterated in the 
Counter-affidavit filed by the State Government. 
38.  This Court concurs with the contention of the Opposite Party 
that Rule-10 of the Rules has been misinterpreted by the 
Petitioner. District Commission, Kandhamal and State 
Commission, Odisha are two distinct quasi-judicial bodies and 
totally separate establishments. It is wrong to say that 
appointment of the Opposite Party No.4 as Member (W) in the 
State Commission is the third term of appointment. 
39.  The Opposite party No.5 worked for two terms in District 
Forum, Sudargarh and Bhubaneswar does not debar her to be 
called for interview for the post of Member (W) in the State 
Commission. Therefore, all the conditions prescribe in the 
Rules are completely satisfied. Additionally, it is pertinent to 
mention here that as per the settled proposition of law, a

Page 23 of 24 
 
candidate/applicant has to comply with all the 
conditions/eligibility criteria as per the advertisement before 
the cut-off date mentioned therein unless extended by the 
recruiting authority. The Supreme Court in the case of the 
State of Bihar & Ors. v. Madhu Kant Ranjan & Anr.3, has held 
that: 
“As per the settled proposition of law, a 
candidate/applicant has to comply with all the 
conditions/eligibility criteria as per the 
advertisement before the cut-off date mentioned 
therein unless extended by the recruiting authority. 
Also, only those documents, which are submitted 
along with the application form, which is required 
to be submitted as per the advertisement have to be 
considered. Therefore, when respondent No.1 – 
original writ petitioner did not produce the 
photocopy of the NCC ‘B’ certificate along with the 
original application as per the advertisement and 
the same was submitted after a period of three years 
from the cut-off date and that too after the physical 
test, he was not entitled to the additional five marks 
of the NCC ‘B’ certificate.” 
40.  In the present case, the Opposite Party No.4 has acquired all 
the requisite qualification and experience prescribed in law 
and the testimonies thereof have been submitted before the 
last date of submission. Hence, she is fully eligible to 
participate in the selection test.  
                                                 
3 Civil Appeal No. 7677 OF 2021 (Supreme Court)

Page 24 of 24 
 
41.  In light of the aforesaid discussion and the cases cited 
hereinabove, this Court finds no merit in the Writ Petition. 
Therefore, this Writ Petition stands dismissed being devoid of 
merit. No order as to costs.  
 
 
                     ( Dr. S.K. Panigrahi )  
                                                                                Judge 
 
Orissa High Court, Cuttack, 
Dated the  3rd July , 2023/B. Jhankar