CRLMC No.1947 of 2021                                             Page 1 of 9 
                                                                     
                                                                                  
    IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK  
  
CRLMC No.  1947  of 20 21  
   
Jayanta Kumar Dash @ Litu  ….  Petitioner  
Mr. Devashis Panda,  Advocate  & 
Mr. S. Panda, Advocate  
 
 
-Versus - 
State of Orissa  and Another  ….  Opposite Part ies  
Mr. S.S.Mohapatra, ASC  
Mr. J.P. Behera, Advocate for O.P. No.2  
 
 
 
 
 
                            CORAM:  
                            JUSTICE  R.K. PATTANAIK  
                                 
  DATE OF JUDGMENT :03 .07 .202 3 
 
 
1.  Instant petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is at th e behest of 
the petitioner challenging the criminal proceeding in connection 
with CT(S) No.94 of 2018 and its continuance before  the court of 
learned Sessions Judge, Dhenkanal on the grounds in ter alia that 
the FIR and other materials on record do not make o ut a prima 
facie case against him and particularly with respec t to an offence 
punishable under Section 376(2)(n) IPC for which he  has been 
charged with besides Section 328 and 506 IPC and Se ctions 66-E 
and 67-A IT Act 2000 which is, therefore, to be qua shed in 
exercise of the Court’s inherent jurisdiction. 
2.  The FIR was lodged by the informant on 4 th  March 2018 
alleging therein the mischief committed by the peti tioner as 
against the victim daughter. In fact, the events an d circumstances 
leading to the lodging of the FIR (Annexure-1) have  been 
described therein by the informant mother. Later to  the FIR 
lodged and on completion of investigation, a charge sheet under 
the alleged offences was submitted against the peti tioner,

Jayanta Kumar Dash @ Litu Vrs.  State of Orissa and Another  
            CRLMC No.1947 of 2021                                            Page 2 of 9 
                                                 
 
consequent upon which, charge was framed and trial started. 
Later to the commencement of trial, referring to th e evidence of 
the victim and other materials with subsequent developments, the 
entire proceeding pending before the learned Sessio ns court has 
been challenged by the petitioner demanding that it  is needed to 
be quashed in the interest of the justice.  
3.  Heard Mr. Panda, learned counsel for the petitioner , Mr. 
Mohapatra, learned counsel for the State besides Mr . Behera, 
learned counsel for the party No.2. 
4.  After the FIR was lodged by the informant, Gondia P S Case 
No. 36 dated 4 th  March 2018 was registered under Sections 
292(A), 354(C) and 506 IPC and Sections 66-E and 67 -A IT Act 
but finally, the chargesheet was submitted for an o ffence under 
Section 376(2)(n) IPC as well. Thereafter, the learned court below 
framed the charge for all the offences including Se ction 376(2)(n) 
IPC. The prosecution of the petitioner particularly  for an offence 
of rape punishable under Section 376(2) (n) IPC is challenged on 
the ground that it is not prima facie made out as a gainst the 
background facts especially considering the consens ual 
relationship between the parties and that the victi m declined to 
be medically examined and her marriage with the pet itioner in 
the meantime. Whether with the allegations on recor d and 
framing of a charge under section 3762(j)(n) IPC an d later to the 
commencement of the trial, inherent jurisdiction un der section 
482 Cr.P.C  should at all with exercised to quash t he proceeding 
on any such grounds raised.  
5. Mr. Panda, learned counsel for the petitioner cit ed the 
following decisions, such as, Ram awatar V rs. State of MP  
(Criminal Appeal No.1392 of 2011) decided on 25 th  October 
2021; Ramgopal and Another Vrs. State of U.P.  dated 29 th

Jayanta Kumar Dash @ Litu Vrs.  State of Orissa and Another  
            CRLMC No.1947 of 2021                                            Page 3 of 9 
                                                 
 
September, 2021 (Criminal Appeal No.1489 of 2012) b esides 
An anda D.V. Vrs. State and Another  (Criminal Appeal No.394-
395 of 2021) disposed of by order dated 12 th  April, 2021 to 
contend that extra-ordinary jurisdiction of this Co urt is required 
to be exercised in the best interest of the parties  notwithstanding 
the commencement of trial for the reason that after  settlement of 
the dispute, the petitioner and opposite party No.2  have married 
and happily leading their conjugal life at present.  It is further 
submitted that there is no bar or any kind of restr iction in the 
exercise of inherent jurisdiction under Section 482  Cr.P.C. at any 
stage of the criminal proceeding and even during th e pendency of 
appeal, if it is really needed to do complete justi ce to the parties 
involved. Referring to the decision in Ramawatar  (supra), it is 
contended that powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. and  Article 142 
of the Constitution of the India are exercisable ev en at the stage 
of posed-conviction. The decision in Ramgopal  (supra) is placed 
reliance on by Mr. Panda to submit that the crimina l proceeding 
before the learned court below wherein trial has co mmenced 
should be brought to an end and terminated consider ing the 
special circumstances and in particular, the marria ge having taken 
place between the parties in order to ensure stabil ity in their 
marital life irrespective of the nature of one of t he offences 
alleged is punishable under Section 376(2)(j)(n) IP C. Similarly, 
referring to the order in Ananda D.V.  (supra), the quashing of the 
criminal proceeding against the petitioner is insis ted upon, as in 
the said case, the parties had resolved their dispu te after 
registration of the FIR and eventually got married.  An additional 
citation in Sudhira @ Biswa Pratap Dalei and Another Vrs. State  
of Odisha and Another  decided in CRLMC No.1077 of 2021 and 
disposed of on 24 th  August, 2021 is submitted, wherein, the case 
was registered under Section 376(2)(n) IPC with oth er allied 
offences including Sections 6 and 7 of the POCSO Act and therein,

Jayanta Kumar Dash @ Litu Vrs.  State of Orissa and Another  
            CRLMC No.1947 of 2021                                            Page 4 of 9 
                                                 
 
the victim apparently left her parental house and j oined the 
company of the accused and subsequently on attainin g her 
majority married the latter. So, therefore, leaving  aside other 
grounds, the contention is that continuance of the prosecution in 
C.T.(S) No.94 of 2018 should be quashed against the  petitioner in 
view of the subsequent development of his marriage with 
opposite party No.2 and for the fact that both are staying 
together and leading a happy and peaceful conjugal life.  
6. Mr. Mohapatra, learned ASC for State on the contr ary 
submitted that the allegations against the petition er are serious in 
nature which includes rape alleged by opposite part y No.2 and in 
the meantime, the trial has commenced and even the victim was 
examined and therefore, under the aforesaid circums tances, the 
criminal proceeding pending before the learned Sess ions court 
should not be quashed more so when the major offences are non-
compoundable in nature. In other words, it is conte nded that 
considering the gravity of the offences alleged, it  is not a fit case 
where inherent jurisdiction should be exercised and  if allowed to 
happen, it would have an adverse influence on the s ociety at 
large and while advancing such an argument,  Mr. Mo hapatra 
cited the decision of the Apex Court in the case of  Parbatbhai 
Aahir @ Parbatbhai Bhimsinhbhai Karmur and Other Vrs. State of 
Gujarat AIR 2017 SC 4843 , wherein, it has been held that power 
under Section 482 Cr.P.C. and while dealing with th e plea that 
the dispute has been settled, the Court must have d ue regard to 
the nature and gravity of the offence. It is furthe r observed 
therein that heinous and serious offences involving  mental 
depravity or offences, such as, murder, rape and da coity cannot 
appropriately be quashed though the victim or her f amily has 
settled the dispute since such offences are not pri vate in nature 
but have a serious impact upon the society and for that matter,

Jayanta Kumar Dash @ Litu Vrs.  State of Orissa and Another  
            CRLMC No.1947 of 2021                                            Page 5 of 9 
                                                 
 
the decision to continue with the trial in cases of  such nature is 
founded on the overriding element of public interes t in punishing 
persons of serious offences. Hence, it is submitted  that as the 
petitioner is facing trial for an offence of rape, even if the parties 
have married in the meantime by itself cannot be a ground to 
quash the prosecution in view of the legal position  enunciated 
Parbatbhai Aahir @ Parbatbhai Bhims inhbhai Karmur  (supra).  
7. The submission of Mr. Behera, learned counsel for  opposite 
party No.2 is recorded. 
8. Admittedly, the petitioner is now facing trial fo r the charged 
offences which includes Section 376(2)(j)(n) IPC. A  copy of the 
charge heads dated 5 th  August, 2019 is at Annexure-2. The FIR 
(Annexure-1) was lodged by the mother of opposite p arty No.2. 
As per the FIR, the petitioner appears to be a dist ant relation of 
the informant. In the said FIR, it has been alleged  that the 
petitioner was responsible in breaking the marriage  proposal and 
engagement of the informant’s daughter which was to  he held on 
8th  March, 2018. In fact, Annexure-1 made to suggest t hat the 
petitioner was against the alleged proposal and mar riage of 
opposite party No.2 as he was in a relationship wit h the latter. As 
per the informant, which is revealed from Annexure- 1, the 
petitioner committed further mischief in sharing so me personal 
objectionable photographs of opposite party No.2 wi th the 
would be bridegroom. With the above allegation, Gon dia P.S. 
Case No.36 was registered. As such, there was no ca se under 
Section 376(2) IPC initially registered which was a dded later on. 
As stated, the trial has already commenced. A copy of the 
deposition of opposite party No.2 examined on 15 th  October, 
2019 as P.W.2 is at Annexure-3. In support of the c laim of 
marriage between the parties, an affidavit sworn by  opposite 
party No.2 dated 18 th  October, 2021 is placed on record along

Jayanta Kumar Dash @ Litu Vrs.  State of Orissa and Another  
            CRLMC No.1947 of 2021                                            Page 6 of 9 
                                                 
 
with a copy of Marriage Certificate dated 28 th  September, 2021 
and the identify proof, such as, copies of the Aadh ar cards duly 
signed by both the parties. As against the aforesai d backdrop, the 
question is, when the petitioner is facing trial for an offence under 
Section 376(2)(j)(n)IPC, whether, the criminal pros ecution against 
him pending before the learned Sessions court shoul d be quashed 
in view of his marriage with opposite party No.2? 
9. It is well settled law that the jurisdiction unde r Section 482 
Cr.P.C. is not fettered with any restriction. To me et extra-
ordinary situations, the inherent power may be invo ked to do 
substantial justice. Even if an offence is non-comp oundable, the 
same shall not stand as a bar for the Court from ex ercising the 
jurisdiction if it is really required to secure the  ends of justice. If 
there is a remote possibility of an outcome in favo ur of the 
prosecution due to certain developments taking plac e involving 
the parties, under such circumstances, it would not  be unjustified 
if the power conferred under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is  exercised to 
quash the criminal proceeding. It depends on the fa cts and 
circumstances of each particular case to decide whe ther inherent 
jurisdiction should at all be exercised. To blindly  express inability 
to such exercise of power merely for the reason tha t a serious 
offence is involved is not a pragmatic approach. At  times, special 
circumstances demand exercise of inherent power the  purpose 
being to do and deliver justice to the parties even  where any 
offence is serious and non-compoundable in nature. If there is a 
relationship between the parties; or the victim sai d to have 
eloped with the accused leading to the registration  of a case for 
an offence of rape and/or under the POCSO Act; or w here after a 
consensual relationship, an allegation of sexual mi schief is made 
by the victim, when her marriage with the accused d id not 
materialize initially but at the end as against the  above

Jayanta Kumar Dash @ Litu Vrs.  State of Orissa and Another  
            CRLMC No.1947 of 2021                                            Page 7 of 9 
                                                 
 
background, marriage has taken place with the diffe rences settled, 
the Court does not find any reason as to why inherent jurisdiction 
should not be exercised. If in such situations, the  prosecution 
would be allowed to continue, the same would definitely result in 
immense inconvenience and hardship to the parties, who are 
settled and and leading a happy marital life. It may be that in case 
the prosecution continues after the marriage betwee n the accused 
and victim, there may be a remote possibility of any conviction as 
the latter is unlikely to depose against the former . But in other 
cases, where the offences are such and the dispute between the 
parties even though settled, it would not be approp riate for the 
Court to exercise inherent power quashing the crimi nal 
prosecution. In other words, where under special ci rcumstances, 
some of which have been illustrated herein before, if the dispute 
is settled between the parties resulting in their marriage, the Court 
is of the humble view that it should not shot its e ye and deny 
exercising inherent power.  
10 . In Ananda D.V.  (supra), the Apex Court considering the 
marriage between the parties, quashed the FIR since  the dispute 
was fully resolved. This Court in Jayanta Kumar Dash @ Litu  
(supra), having regard to the fact that the victim,  a minor by the 
time of alleged occurrence, since eloped with the a ccused and 
subsequently, married him, exercised the jurisdicti on under 
Section 482 Cr.P.C. and quashed the proceeding pend ing before 
the Special court. In Ramawatar  (supra), the Supreme Court 
discussed in detail about the manner in which juris diction under 
Section 482 Cr.P.C. should be exercised and finally  quashed the 
criminal proceedings which involved an offence unde r the SC&ST 
(PoA) Act so as to do complete justice between the parties and 
reiterated therein that such power is exercisable at post-conviction 
stage. Similar is the view expressed by the Supreme  Court in

Jayanta Kumar Dash @ Litu Vrs.  State of Orissa and Another  
            CRLMC No.1947 of 2021                                            Page 8 of 9 
                                                 
 
Ramgopal  (supra). In so far as the authority in Parbatbhai Aahir 
@ Parbatbhai Bhimsinhbhai Karmur  (supra) is concerned, a 
general law has been laid down that in serious offe nces like rape, 
murder, dacoity etc. power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is not to be 
exercised. It does not mean that under circumstance s such as 
marriage between the parties even after a failed or  disturbed 
relationship, such jurisdiction cannot at all be ex ercised which is 
not to be deduced as a ratio of the aforesaid decis ion. Under the 
circumstances, some of which have been outlined bef ore though 
not exhaustive, keeping in view the special situati ons, according 
to the Court, extra-ordinary power may be exercised  so as to 
advance real justice. It is no doubt that cases inv olving offences of 
grievous nature committed in a given set of facts u nlike the 
illustrated ones, the Court is not to invoke such jurisdiction since it 
would impact the society. But in befitting cases, w here its exercise 
is really needed to do complete justice, compromise  and 
settlement of dispute resulting in marriage between  the parties 
even involved in a strained relationship may be a j ustifiable 
ground to bring an end to the prosecution and terminated. 
11 . In the instant case, indisputably, the marriage h as taken place 
between the parties. The victim has filed an affida vit to that effect 
stating that she is presently leading a settled mar ital life. From 
Annexure-1, it is made to suggest that in some mann er both the 
parties developed relationship after their brief en counter. Of 
course, the petitioner alleged to have committed ce rtain mischief 
when the marriage of opposite party No.2 was propos ed 
elsewhere perhaps as a reaction to it. The petition er is not an 
outsider but distantly related to the informant as disclosed in 
Annexure-1. After marriage of the victim was fixed at another 
place, the petitioner did the mischief and was alle gedly 
instrumental in breaking the former’s engagement. T hough the

Jayanta Kumar Dash @ Litu Vrs.  State of Orissa and Another  
            CRLMC No.1947 of 2021                                            Page 9 of 9 
                                                 
 
conduct of the petitioner is condemnable but as it seems, the 
same was while encountering an adverse situation. N evertheless, 
Court does not in any manner approve such conduct o f the 
petitioner. But, at the same time, considering the circumstances 
and subsequent marriage, the Court is also of the v iew that the 
prosecution needs termination to ensure peace and s tability in the 
lives of the parties. Before parting with, the Cour t has gone 
through the nature of evidence deposed by opposite party No.2 
which is on record. Under the special circumstances  and having 
regard to the settled position of law discussed abo ve, the Court 
does feel that it is a fit case where inherent juri sdiction should be 
exercised in the best interest of the parties. 
12 . Accordingly, it is ordered. 
13 . In the result, the petition stands allowed. As a necessary 
corollary, the criminal proceeding in connection wi th CT(S) 
No.94 of 2018 pending before the learned Sessions j udge, 
Dhenkanal corresponding to G.R.Case No.222 of 2018 arising out 
of Gondia PS Case No. 36 dated 4 th  March, 2018 is hereby 
quashed vis-à-vis the petitioner for the reasons di scussed herein 
before.   
    
 
         
       (R.K. Pattanaik)  
             Judge  
 
 
 
 
Tudu/Roji