Page 1 of 7 
CRLA No.168 of 2023 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK 
CRLA No.168 of 2023 
 
In the matter of an Appeal under section 374(2) of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 and from the judgment of conviction  and order of 
sentence dated 26 th  December, 2022 passed by the learned Sessions Judge, 
Gajapati, Paralakhemundi in S.T. Case No.37 of 2020.  
---- 
Samuel @ Samiel Palaka @ Mishal …..        Appellan t 
-versus- 
State of Odisha  …. Respondent  
 
Appeared in this case by Hybrid Arrangement 
(Virtual/Physical Mode: 
================================================== 
 For Appellant - Mr.B.R.Tripathy 
     (Advocate)  
     
     
 For Respondent  -  Mr.S.K. Nayak 
     Addl. Govt. Advocate  
CORAM: 
MR. JUSTICE D.DASH 
DR. JUSTICE S.K. PANIGRAHI 
 
DATE OF HEARING :15.05.2023 : DATE OF JUDGMENT: 21.06.2023 
D.Dash, J.  The Appellant, by filing this Appeal, has attacked the judgment of 
conviction and order of sentence dated 26.12.2022 p assed by the learned 
Sessions Judge, Gajapati, Paralakhemundi in S.T. No .37 of 2020 arising 
out of G.R. Case No.50 of 2020 corresponding to Kas hinagar P.S. Case 
No.51 of 2020 of the Court of learned Judicial Magi strate First Class 
(J.M.F.C.), Kashinagar. 
  The Appellant (accused) thereunder has been convi cted for 
committing the offence under section-302 of the Ind ian Penal Code, 1860 
(for short ‘the IPC’) and accordingly, he has been sentenced to undergo 
imprisonment for life with payment of fine of Rs.10 ,000/- (Rupees Ten

{{ 2 }} 
 
Page 2 of 7 
CRLA No.168 of 2023 
 
Thousand) in default to undergo rigorous imprisonme nt for a period of 
one (1) year.  
2. The prosecution case is that on 29.05.2020  in th e afternoon around 
12.20 p.m., there was a quarrel between the accused  and Dhanunjaya Jena 
(deceased). During the said quarrel, the accused is  said to have dealt a 
blow on the head of the deceased by means of a lath i. He then fell on the 
ground. It is further stated that sometime thereaft er the accused assaulted 
the deceased in front of the Office of the Revenue Inspector of the village. 
It is stated that the accused there gave a blow on the right leg of the 
deceased by means of an axe. The wife of the deceas ed (P.W.4) and her 
daughters (P.W.3 and 10) rushed to the spot and the refrom when they 
raised shout to rescue the deceased,  the accused f led away from the spot 
carrying the axe. The wife of the deceased (P.W.4) with the help of others 
then shifted the deceased to Kashinagar Hospital by  an Ambulance where 
the Doctor declared the deceased as dead. She then lodged a written report 
with the Inspector-in-Charge (I.I.C.), Kashinagar Police Station. The I.I.C. 
receiving the said report treated that as First Inf ormation Report (F.I.R.-
Ext.4) and registered the case. He then took up the  investigation. The 
Investigating Officer (I.O.-P.W.12) then examined t he Informant (P.W.4) 
and other witnesses. He also held the inquest over the dead body and 
prepared his report (Ext.1). The accused being arre sted gave recovery of 
the axe after giving statement to the I.O. (P.W.12)  by leading him and 
others to the place of keeping of the said axe. The  dead body of the 
deceased was sent for Post Mortem Examination upon issuance of 
necessary requisition. The incriminating articles s eized in course of 
investigation were sent for chemical examination th rough Court. On 
completion of investigation, the I.O. (P.W.12) subm itted the Final Form

{{ 3 }} 
 
Page 3 of 7 
CRLA No.168 of 2023 
 
placing the accused to face the Trial for commissio n of offence under 
section 302, I.P.C. 
3. Learned J.M.F.C., Kasinagar having received the F inal Form as 
above, took cognizance of the said offences and aft er observing the 
formalities, committed the case to the Court of Ses sions. That is how the 
Trial commenced by framing the charge for the said offences against the 
accused.  
4. In course of Trial, the prosecution examined in t otal thirteen (13) 
witnesses. As already stated, the Informant, who is  the wife of the 
deceased is P.W.1 and her two daughters are P.W.3 a nd P.W.10. Another 
witness who is a co-villager and is said to have se en the occurrence has 
come to the witness box as P.W.11. The witness to t he seizure of the axe 
at the instance of the accused is P.W.6 and another  co-villager who had 
informed P.W.3, 4 and 10 about the occurrence which  had taken place 
near the R.I. Office is P.W.13. The Medical Officer s are P.W.7 and 8 and 
the I.O. has come to the witness box at the end as P.W.12. 
 The prosecution having led the evidence by examini ng the above 
witnesses has also proved several documents, which have been marked 
Exts.1 to 29. Of those, the important  are the F.I.R. (Ext.4) and the Inquest 
Report as well as the Post Mortem Examination Repor t which are Ext.1 
and 7. The Chemical Examiner’s reports has been mar ked as Ext.28 and 
29 respectively.   
 The plea of defence is denial and false implicatio n. He has, 
however, not tendered any evidence in support of the defence.    
5. The evidence of the Doctor, P.W.7 and his report (Ext.1) reveals 
that the deceased had sustained lacerated injury of  size 5’’ x 2’’ x 2’’ at 
right popliteal fossa with rupture of muscles and n eurovascular bundle

{{ 4 }} 
 
Page 4 of 7 
CRLA No.168 of 2023 
 
and there was a contusion of the size 1’’ x ½’’ on the left leg around 10’’ 
below the knee joint as also three numbers of scratch marks on the middle 
of the chest. P.W.7 has stated that said injuries a re ante mortem in nature 
and the death to be homicidal. 
  It is stated by P.W.7 that the death is caused du e to hypovolemic 
shock as a result of massive haemorrhage.  
  The Investigating Officer, P.W.12 having reached the spot had held 
inquest over the dead body and he too had noticed all these injuries on the 
body of the deceased and accordingly, he had noted so in his inquest 
report, Ext.1. With such evidence on record remaini ng unquestioned, we 
are in wholly in agreement with the finding of the Trial Court that the 
nature of death of deceased Dhanunjaya Jena  was homicidal.  
6. Learned Counsel for the Appellant, from the beginni ng instead of 
questioning the finding of the Trial Court as regar ds the act done by the 
accused in assaulting deceased, confined his submis sion on the score that 
even accepting the prosecution case as it emerges f rom the evidence, the 
accused for the said act and role played cannot be held guilty for 
committing the offence under section-302 of the IPC  and at best, it would 
be one under section-304 Part-II of the IPC. In thi s connection, he has 
invited our attention to the depositions of the wit nesses who have simply 
stated to have seen the accused assaulting the dece ased in course of 
quarrel which continued for quite a long time between the accused and the 
deceased. He further submitted that it is not the c ase of the prosecution 
that accused assaulted by any sharp cutting weapon and the injuries are 
said to be by hard and blunt weapon. He further sub mitted that as per the 
evidence of P.W.7, the only injury on the head of t he deceased has led to 
her death, when all other injuries are mere abrasions and lacerations which 
might have taken place in course of continuous quar rel between two. He

{{ 5 }} 
 
Page 5 of 7 
CRLA No.168 of 2023 
 
also submitted that the prosecution witnesses is si lent as to who triggered 
the quarrel and it was at what point of time and wh y in course of quarrel, 
the accused started assaulting the deceased and wha t was the reason to 
immediately do so, being so provoked in any way or not. In view of all 
these above, he contended that it is a case where t he accused, at best, 
would be liable for commission of offence under section-304 Part-II of the 
IPC but not under section-302 of the IPC.  
 7. Learned Counsel for the State contended that it be ing the evidence 
on record that it is the accused who had assaulted the deceased 
continuously and the injury caused by him on the he ad of the deceased by 
means of hard and blunt weapon, has resulted the de ath of deceased, 
Dhanunjaya Jena, the conviction has to be recorded one under section-302 
of the IPC, which the Trial Court has rightly held.  
 8. Keeping in view the submissions made; we have care fully gone 
through the judgment passed by the Trial Court. We have also extensively 
travelled through the depositions of the prosecutio n witnesses i.e. P.Ws. 1 
to 13 and have perused the documents which have bee n admitted in 
evidence and marked as Exts. 1 to 29. 
 9. In order to address the submission of the learned counsel for the 
Appellant which is now only confined as to categori zation of the offence 
committed by the accused upon acceptance of his role in entirety, as stated 
by the prosecution witnesses, we feel it apposite t o glance at the evidence 
of the Doctor who had held the Post Mortem Examinat ion over the dead 
body of the deceased, i.e., P.W.7. He has stated to  have noticed lacerated 
injury of the size of 5’’ x 2’’ x 2’’ at right popl iteal fossa with rupture of 
muscles and neurovascular bundle. He  has further s tated to have seen a 
contusion of size 1’’ x ½’’ on the left leg around 10’’ below the knee joint

{{ 6 }} 
 
Page 6 of 7 
CRLA No.168 of 2023 
 
and three numbers of scratch marks on the middle of  the chest. It is his 
evidence that the death was due to hypovolemic shoc k as a result of 
massive haemorrhage. He has found all the internal organs intact, which is 
stated by him as sufficient to cause the death of a  person in ordinary 
course of nature unless medical intervention is giv en in proper time. At 
the same time, he has opined that such injuries are  also possible if 
someone falls with sufficient force on sharp object  from a height. In fact, 
when it is said that there was assault upon the dec eased by the accused by 
means of a lathi, there is no external injury on th e head. As regards the 
happening of the incident, it has been stated by P.W.5 that the accused and 
deceased were quarreling with each other and there was push and pull for 
which he too had intervened. It is further stated t hat he was taking the 
accused to the village and then the deceased reache d there and assaulted 
the accused by giving blows on his legs by stick an d thereafter they had 
again quarreled. 
  Cumulatively viewing all these circumstances appe aring in the 
entire evidence as above discussed, we are of the v iew that the offence 
could be properly categorized as one punishable und er section-304 Part-II 
of the IPC and thus the accused is liable for commi ssion of offence 
punishable under section-304 Part-II of the IPC. Ac cordingly, he is to be 
visited with the sentence commensurate the act done by him.  
10. In the result, the Appeal stands allowed in part.  The conviction 
recorded against the accused under section-302 of t he IPC is modified to 
one under section-304 Part-II of the IPC and conseq uentially, we are of 
the considered opinion that the sentence to undergo  rigorous 
imprisonment for a period of seven (7) years with f ine of Rs.2,000/- 
(Rupees Two Thousand) in default to undergo rigorou s imprisonment for 
two months would be just and proper and meet the ends of justice.

{{ 7 }} 
 
Page 7 of 7 
CRLA No.168 of 2023 
 
11. With the above modification as to the judgment of  conviction and 
order of sentence, the Appeal stands disposed of.  
 
  
            (D. Dash), 
   Judge. 
 
 
      Dr.S.K. Panigrahi, J.  I Agree. 
 
 
 
 
          (Dr.S.K.Panigrahi), 
     Judge. 
 
 
Himanshu