Page 1 of 10 
JCRLA No.30 of 2017 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK 
JCRLA No.30 of 2017  
 
In the matter of an Appeal under section 383 of the  Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 and from the judgment of conviction  and order of 
sentence dated 25.01.2017 passed by the learned Ses sions Judge, 
Sundargarh in Sessions Trial No.78 of 2014.  
---- 
Kedar @ Dambarudhar Rohidas …..        Appellant 
-versus- 
State of Odisha  …. Respondent  
 
Appeared in this case by Hybrid Arrangement 
(Virtual/Physical Mode: 
================================================== 
For Appellant - Mr. Sahasransu Sourav, 
 Advocate,  
     
     
 For Respondent  -  Mr. S.S. Mohapatra, 
     Additional Standing Counsel.  
CORAM: 
 
MR. JUSTICE D.DASH 
DR. JUSTICE S.K. PANIGRAHI 
 
DATE OF HEARING :17.05.2023 : DATE OF JUDGMENT:21.0 6.2023 
D.Dash, J.  The Appellant from inside the jail has assailed the  judgment of 
conviction and order of sentence dated 25.01.2017 p assed by the 
learned Sessions Judge, Sundargarh in Sessions Tria l No.78 of 2014 
arising out of Sundargarh Town P.S. Case No.02 of 2 014 of the Court 
of the learned Sub-Divisional Judicial Magistrate ( S.D.J.M.), 
Sundargarh. 
  The Appellant (accused), having been charged for commission 
of offence under section 302 of the Indian Penal Co de, 1860 (for short 
‘the IPC’), has been sentenced to imprisonment for life and pay fine of

{{ 2 }} 
 
Page 2 of 10 
JCRLA No. 30 of 2017 
 
Rs.10,000/- in default to undergo simple imprisonme nt for a period of 
two years.  
2. The prosecution case is on 03.01.2014 evening, it  was around 7 
pm, when Trilochan Rohidas (P.W.2) was in his house, his aunt-in-law, 
Toro Rohidas (P.W.11) came running and told him tha t his sister had 
been killed by the accused being set ablaze.  Trilo chan (P.W.2) being 
accompanied by his wife (P.W.8) then rushed to the spot and saw the 
blouse and petticoat of sister burning and his sist er then was shouting 
to save her. Trilochan (P.W.2) then removed her wea ring apparels and 
wife of the informant (P.W.8) covered her body by a  blanket and 
thereafter she was shifted to the Government Hospit al, Sundargarh for 
treatment. On enquiry by the Informant (2), it was known from his 
sister that her husband (accused) was in the habit of quarreling with her 
and that after quarreling; he set fire on her by sp rinkling kerosene over 
her body.  
 It was around 8.30 pm, on that day, P.W.2 presente d a written 
report to the Sub-Inspector (SI) of Police (P.W.6),  who was in charge 
of the Inspector-In-Charge (IIC-P.W.1) of Sundargar h Town P.S.  
Receiving the said written report, P.W.6 treated th e same as F.I.R. and 
registering the case, took up investigation.  
3. In course of investigation, the Investigating Off icer (I.O.-P.W.6) 
examined the Informant (P.W.2) and the witnesses, v isited the post and 
prepared spot map, Ext.7. He seized wearing apparel s of the deceased 
as well as that of the accused. He then requisition ed the service of the 
Executive Magistrate for recording of the statement  of the victim, who 
was then undergoing treatment at Ispat General Hosp ital (I.G.H.), 
Rourkela. The statement of the victim was recorded.  In course of

{{ 3 }} 
 
Page 3 of 10 
JCRLA No. 30 of 2017 
 
investigation, when victim died, inquest over the d ead body was held 
and report to that effect was prepared, Ext.2. The dead body was then 
sent for postmortem examination and the report to t hat effect (Ext.5) 
was also received. Lastly, the I.O. (P.w.16) has ha nded over the charge 
of investigation to the IIC.  
 On completion of investigation, final form was sub mitted, 
placing the accused to face the trial for commissio n of offence under 
section-498-A/302 of the IPC.  
4. Learned Sub-Divisional Judicial Magistrate (S.D.J .M.), 
Sundargarh having received the Final Form as above,  took cognizance 
of the said offences and after observing the formal ities, committed the 
case to the Court of Sessions. That is how the tria l commenced by 
framing the charge for the said offences against the accused persons.   
5. In course of Trial, the prosecution examined in t otal sixteen (16) 
witnesses. As already stated, P.W.2 is the brother of the deceased and 
he is the Informant; whereas P.Ws. 4 & 5 are the fa ther and mother of 
the deceased and P.W.6 is their neighbor. The broth er of P.W.2 
(Informant) has been examined as P.W/.7 and P.W.8 i s the wife of the 
P.W.2. Three neighbours have come to the witness bo x as P.Ws. 9 to 
11. The Doctor who had treated the deceased in the District 
Headquarter Hospital, Sundargarh has been examined as P.W.12; 
whereas the Doctor who had conducted autopsy over t he dead body of 
the deceased has deposed as P.W.13. P.W.2’s cousin brother is P.W.14. 
The Executive Magistrate who had recorded the state ment of the 
deceased prior to her death and proved the statemen t of the deceased 
which he had been reduced into writing and marked as Ext.6 is P.W.15. 
Other important witnesses for the prosecution is P. W.14, the cousin

{{ 4 }} 
 
Page 4 of 10 
JCRLA No. 30 of 2017 
 
brother of the Informant (P.W.2), the Investigating  Officer has come to 
the witness box at the end as P.W.16.  
 The prosecution besides leading evidence by examin ing the 
above witnesses has also proved several documents w hich have been 
admitted in evidence and marked Exts.1 to 9. Out of  those, importants 
are the F.I.R. (Ext.1), the injury report (Ext.4), statement of the 
deceased recorded by the P.W.15 marked as Ext.6 and  the inquest 
report as well as the postmortem report, which are Ext.2 and Ext.5 
respectively.  
 The defence case is that of complete denial and fa lse implication. 
No evidence has been let in by the accused in the trial.  
6.  Learned Counsel for the Appellant from the begin ning without 
disputing that the death of the deceased had taken place on account of 
sever burn injuries received submitted that the pro secution evidence 
regarding act of the accused that he had set the de ceased ablaze is not 
reliable. According to him, the evidence of prosecu tion with regard to 
the role played by the accused in causing the burn injuries over the 
dead body of his wife (deceased) as placed on being  properly 
appreciated do not establish the said fact beyond r easonable doubt. He 
further submitted that the dying declaration said t o have been made by 
the deceased from time to time including the one wh ich is said to have 
been recorded by P.W.15, the Executive Magistrate cannot be accepted 
as the true version of the deceased. He further sub mitted that when 
with such high percentage of burn injuries, the dec eased being in a 
position to speak being highly doubtful, the Trial Court ought not to 
have relied the version of those witnesses, who hav e stated that the 
deceased had disclosed before them that it was the accused who had set 
her ablaze. In support of the same, he, with great pain, has invited our

{{ 5 }} 
 
Page 5 of 10 
JCRLA No. 30 of 2017 
 
attention to the depositions of all the prosecution  witnesses in pointing 
out infirmities therein standing as impediment for acceptance of said 
evidence, which would be discussed in the paras to follow. He thus 
submitted that with the available evidence on recor d, the prosecution 
cannot be said to have established the charge again st the accused 
beyond reasonable doubt by leading clear, cogent an d acceptable 
evidence.   
7. Learned Counsel for the State-Respondent on the oth er hand 
supported the finding guilt of the accused as has b een returned by the 
Trial Court. According to him, the prosecution evid ence as placed are 
wholly reliable and even leaving aside everything, when the evidence 
of P.w.15, the Executive Magistrate firmly stands, that is enough to 
fasten the guilt upon the accused for having burnt his wife to death. 
 8. Keeping in view the submissions made; we have care fully gone 
through the judgment passed by the Trial Court and we have also 
extensively travelled through the depositions of th e prosecution 
witnesses i.e. P.Ws. 1 to 16 and have perused the d ocuments which 
have been admitted in evidence and marked as Exts.1 to 9. 
 9. In order to address the rival submission and judg e the 
sustainability of the finding of the Trial Court th at, it is the accused 
who had burnt his wife to death, we are called upon  to undertake the 
exercise of detail examination of the evidence on record.  
  First of all, coming to the evidence of P.W.2, th e brother-in-law 
of the accused, who is the Informant and has proved  the F.I.R. lodged 
by him as Ext.1, we find him to have stated that on  03.01.2014 during 
evening hour one Toro Rohidas (P.W.11) who is a nei ghbour of the 
accused came to their house and shouted that the si ster of P.W.2 was

{{ 6 }} 
 
Page 6 of 10 
JCRLA No. 30 of 2017 
 
assaulted by her husband and then had been set ablaze. The evidence of 
this P.W.2 further goes to show the immediate respo nse on hearing 
about the incident. He states to have immediately r ushed to the spot 
with his wife (P.W.8). He has stated to have seen h is sister on fire. It is 
his further evidence that in order to save the life  of his sister, he with 
his wife put placed clothes upon her and removed he r wearing apparels 
and then immediately shifted her to the Government Hospital at 
Sundargarh. Most importantly, he states that during  this period, his 
sister (deceased) was repeatedly saying that the ac cused pouring 
kerosene upon her had set her ablaze. After admitti ng his sister in the 
hospital, he has gone to lodge the written report a t the police station. 
During cross-examination, this witness has re-affir med about the 
information being given by P.W.11 to him by coming to his house, 
which is situated two to three houses apart from ho use of the accused. 
He has further stated that at the time of his arriv al, the accused was 
very much present therein silently watching the bur ning of his wife. 
We find nothing to have elicited during the cross-examination from this 
witness as to any element of falsehood as regards h is rushing to the 
spot with his wife. The evidence of this witness, P .W.2 and that of of 
this witness P.W.8 (wife) is read with the evidence  of P.W.11, we find 
their versions to be quite consistent with one another.  
  P.W.8 has further stated that the accused pouring  kerosene upon 
his wife setting her to fire by igniting a match st ick. Her response is 
equal to that of P.W.2. She has also stated about t he presence of the 
accused at the relevant time inside the house. The defence has not been 
able to shake the evidence of P.W.8 in any manner s o as to cast any 
doubt on her version that she had accompanied P.W.2  to the place. 
When above is the evidence of P.Ws.2 and 8.

{{ 7 }} 
 
Page 7 of 10 
JCRLA No. 30 of 2017 
 
  The father of the deceased who happens to be the father of 
P.W.2 states about the strain relationship between the accused and his 
wife and his rushing to the spot. His further evide nce is that his 
daughter (deceased) then told that the accused pour ing kerosene upon 
her body had set her ablaze by igniting the match s tick. So, the 
evidence of P.W.2, 3 and 8 that the deceased had im mediately 
disclosed, seeing them that it was the accused who had set her ablaze 
by sprinkle kerosene over her body  and lighting ma tch stick appear to 
be wholly consistent with one another.  
  P.W.5, the mother of the deceased although has no t repeated the 
same version as to what the deceased disclosed befo re them regarding 
the role of the accused for setting her ablaze. The  version of this P.W.5 
appears to be free from any exaggeration, when she does not state to 
have rushed to the spot hearing about the incident with other members 
of the family. She also does not state to have hear d the deceased telling 
before them as to what the accused did. She states that the villagers 
were shouting that the accused had set his wife abl aze. This part of her 
evidence is not there in her previous statement bef ore the police. But 
when we find the evidence of other witnesses as alr eady discussed 
regarding said disclosure being made by the decease d even if for a 
moment, it is not said that this P.W.5 had not hear d anything about the 
incident from the villagers that does not shake the  substratum of the 
evidence of other witnesses. The P.W.6 has also rep eated the same 
version as regards disclosure of the deceased befor e them about the 
accused to have poured kerosene upon her and set her ablaze.  
   P.W.1’s  brother-in-law is P.W.7. It is his evid ence that after 
hearing about the hospitalization of the sister of P.W.1, when he had 
been to the IGH, Rourkela, where the deceased was u ndergoing

{{ 8 }} 
 
Page 8 of 10 
JCRLA No. 30 of 2017 
 
treatment, he having asked the deceased as to what happened, the 
deceased had so spoken implicating the accused to h ave caused such 
burn injuries upon her. This witness having admitte d to have not stated 
that part before the police, no such importance, in  our view, cannot be 
taken into account as a contradiction as that not b een proved through 
the I.O. (P.W.16). That apart, when this witness ha s stated to have not 
been examined by police, we on record find it diffe rent. In view of the 
fact that the witness hails from rural background a nd lives on 
cultivation, his memorizing power and intelligence quotient cannot be 
taken to be of that level to remember as to what he  had stated during 
investigation. But it having been shown that his ev idence is based on 
falsehood; his evidence in Court under the circumst ance and for the 
discussion must stand.  
  Neighbour of the accused-P.W.9, who is a girl age d about 19 
years and was then reading in +3 Arts 2 nd  year  has also stated that 
when she went to the place and found the deceased i n a burning 
condition, which was somehow put off, the deceased had told regarding 
the complicity of the accused. During cross-examina iton, she having 
been asked that she has no personal knowledge about the same, that has 
been stoutly denied. She has further stated about t he presence of P.W.2 
and other members at that time as also the accused.  These are all the 
evidence of the relations of the deceased and accus ed as well as the 
villagers. We find absolutely no reason to entertai n any doubt over the 
evidence of these witnesses, when they have stated to have rushed to 
the spot and to have known of all these witnesses, when they have 
stated to have rushed to the spot and to have rushe d to the spot and 
known about the incident from the deceased, who had  then specifically 
implicated the accused in causing such burn injuries upon her.

{{ 9 }} 
 
Page 9 of 10 
JCRLA No. 30 of 2017 
 
10. The Doctor, who had admitted the patient in Distr ict 
Headquarter Hospital, Sundargarh has clearly stated  that the patient 
was conscious and complaining of pain and therefore , she was referred 
to VSS Medical College and Hospital, Burla for bett er treatment.  The 
deceased died on 14.01.2014 in the IGH, Rourkela. D uring that period 
on police requisition, the P.W.15, the Tahasildar, Rourkela exercising 
the power of Executive Magistrate has recorded the statement of the 
deceased on 07.01.2014. It has been stated by him t hat the deceased 
was then able to speak and that by putting some que stion, he had 
ascertained that she was in a fit state to give her  statement. It has been 
stated by P.W.15 that:- 
“xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx then on the asked her regarding  the 
cause of injury sustained by her and to that she an swered that 
on last Friday at about 6.30 pm after returning fro m labour 
work to her house, when she found her husband aslee p, he 
tried to woke him up. All of a sudden, her husband woke 
poured kerosene on her body and set her ablaze by l ighting 
match stick.”  
 P.W.15 has further stated that on being specificall y asked as to 
how it all happened; the deceased had implicated th e accused. This 
P.W.15 has stated that he had asked the question to  the deceased 
patient who was then under treatment in Odia langua ge and she also 
replied in Odia language. It has been stated by him  that he had then 
translated the same in English and wrote on a sheet  of paper. It is also 
his evidence that one female nurse was present at t he time and she had 
put her signature. The recorded statement has been proved by this 
witness P.W.15 and admitted in evidence and marked as Ext.6. He has 
provided the explanation that as the hands of the p atient were 
bandaged; signature or LTI of the patient could not  be taken. He was

{{ 10 }} 
 
Page 10  of 10 
JCRLA No. 30 of 2017 
 
clearly stated during cross-examination that at the  time he recorded the 
statement of the deceased, no Doctor was present.  
 The Investigating Officer, P.W.16 has stated that having 
received the information with regard to the shiftin g of the patient to 
IGH, Rourkela, he has sent the requisition for reco rding of the 
statement of the patient by an Executive Magistrate. The said statement 
recorded by P.W.15 as Ext.6 and his evidence, we fi nd to be wholly 
consistent with the evidence of the prosecution wit nesses that the 
deceased had disclosed that it was the accused who had set her ablaze. 
The evidence of the prosecution as discussed above,  being found to be 
free from any such infirmity, we are of the conside red view that the 
Trial Court has rightly held the same to be the rel iable and thus having 
accepted the same in holding the accused guilty for  committing the 
murder of his wife by sprinkling kerosene upon her body and setting 
her ablaze, the Trial Court did commit no mistake. The judgment of 
conviction and order of sentence, therefore, receiv e the seal of 
affirmation.  
11. In the result, the Appeal stands dismissed. The j udgment of 
conviction and order of sentence dated 25 
th  January, 2017 passed by the 
learned Sessions Judge, Sundargarh in Sessions Tria l Case No.78 of 
2014 are hereby confirmed. 
  
            (D. Dash), 
   Judge. 
 
 
      Dr.S.K. Panigrahi, J.  I Agree. 
 
 
 
          (Dr.S.K.Panigrahi), 
     Judge. 
 
Narayan