Page 1 of 11 
 
 
 IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK 
 
WPC (OAC) No.2783 of 2017  
 
      
Ashis Kumar Mishra ….         Petitioner 
  
-versus- 
 
State of Odisha and Ors.  …. Opposite Parties 
 
 
    Advocates appeared in the case through Hybrid Mode: 
For Petitioners  : Mr. Subash Chandra Puspalaka, 
Adv. 
 
For Opposite Parties. :  Mr. D.K. Mohanty, ASC 
 
                    
    
 
     CORAM:                         
                        Dr. JUSTICE S.K. PANIGRAHI  
     
 
 
DATE OF HEARING:-21.06.2023 
DATE OF JUDGMENT: -03.07.2023 
 
 Dr. S.K. Panigrahi, J. 
1. The Petitioner, in this Writ Petition, seeks a direction from this 
Court to the Opposite Parties/ State not to publish the result of 
the Departmental Proceeding No.7 of 2016 till completion of the 
Trial in C.T. Case No.59 of 2016 pending before the learned 
Sessions Judge, Jagatsinghpur against him, as both the 
proceedings arise out of same fact and cause of action.

Page 2 of 11 
 
I. FACTS OF THE CASE: 
2. The brief facts of the case, in a nutshell, is that the Petitioner  is 
serving as Constable in the office of the Reserve Police, 
Jagatsinghpur under the control of Superintendent of Police, 
Jagatsinghpur. He has been implicated in Jagatsinghpur P.S 
Case No.296 of 2015 corresponding to G.R Case No.997 of 2015 
for the offences punishable under Sections 307, 294, 120-B, 201, 
109, 34 of the I.P.C. and Sections 25 and 27 of the Arms Act 
based on which the Departmental Proceeding No.7 of 2016 was 
initiated against him in which the witnesses have been 
examined. Thereafter, the date has been fixed to 15.10.2017 to 
submit the written statement of defence on behalf of the 
Petitioner. 
3. One Pramod Rout of Jagatsinghpur lodged a written report on 
10.09.2015 before the Jagatsinghpur Police Station alleging 
therein that on the same day at about 5.30 pm, three unknown 
persons came on a motor cycle and fired at him. Fortunately, the 
bullets missed the target and he did not get hit. On the basis of 
such allegation, Jagatsinghpur Police Case No.296 of 2015 was 
registered against the unknown accused persons. During the 
course of investigation, the name of one Tulia Mishra came up 
wherein some of the co-accused persons have stated that Tulia 
Mishra has made a conspiracy against Pramod Rout. During 
investigation it was learned that the Petitioner had called Tulia

Page 3 of 11 
 
Mishra from his mobile phone due to which the Petitioner was 
implicated in this case and he was arrested on 22.09.2015 but 
released on bail. Thereafter, the police filed charge sheet in the 
criminal case and the case was committed to the court of the 
learned Sessions Judge, Jagatsinghpur and numbered as C.T. 
Case No.59 of 2016 and is ready for trial. 
4. Based on the accusation in the criminal case, the Superintendent 
of Police, Jagatsinghpur initiated Departmental Proceeding No.7 
of 2016 against the Petitioner and framed charges of gross 
misconduct and involvement in the criminal case. In the said 
charge, it is stated that on 14.07.2015 at about 8 pm, the 
Petitioner along with N.K. Kanungoo, P.K. Malik, S.P. Sahoo 
were commanded to report before the Additional 
Superintendent of Police to perform emergency duty. On 
22.09.2015 at about 1.15 pm, the I.I.C. Paradeep Police Station 
found that the Petitioner was absent from his duty without any 
leave or permission from the authority and on the same day, he 
was involved in Jagatsinghpur P.S Case No.296 of 2015 in which 
Pramod Rout was the informant. Therefore, he was asked to 
show-cause as to why action shall not be taken against him.  
5. After receiving the charge-sheet, the Petitioner filed the show-
cause denying the charges leveled against him. He further stated 
that one Tulia Mishra has been implicated in this case who 
happens to be his relation. It was learned from the call details

Page 4 of 11 
 
that the petitioner had talked with Tulia Mishra and therefore 
the police have implicated him in the criminal case.  
6. The Petitioner submitted the show-cause with a request to 
exonerate him from the Departmental Proceeding. However, the 
same was not considered and inquiry in the Department 
Proceeding was contemplated. The Petitioner had been asked to 
submit the show-cause/written defence along with material 
evidence in his support for submitting findings in the case by 
15.10.2017 vide letter dated 15.09.2017 of the Additional S.P.-
cum-Inquiring Officer.  
7. As the Departmental Proceedings has been initiated based on 
the criminal case, the Petitioner apprehends that in case he will 
be punished in the Departmental Proceedings then it may cause 
prejudiced to him as there is every likelihood that the 
punishment in the Departmental Proceedings may affect the 
criminal trial. Hence, this Writ Petition.  
II. SUBMISSIONS ADVANCED ON BEHALF OF THE 
PETITIONER: 
8. Learned counsel for the Petitioner submitted that the Petitioner 
has been falsely implicated in Jagatsinghpur P.S Case No.296 of 
2015 corresponding to G.R case No.997 of 2015 based on which 
the Departmental Proceeding No.7 of 2016 was initiated against 
him. During the course of investigation, the name of one Tulia 
Mishra came out and some of the co-accused persons had stated

Page 5 of 11 
 
that Tulia Mishra had made a conspiracy against Pramod Rout. 
He contended that since the Petitioner had called Tulia Mishra 
from his mobile phone for which the Petitioner was implicated 
in this case and he was arrested on 22.09.2015 and released on 
bail. 
9. It was further submitted that the Departmental Proceeding is 
complete and the Petitioner was directed to submit the written 
statement. Thereafter, the Inquiring Officer would give his 
findings on the basis of which the Disciplinary Authority shall 
impose punishment as the proceeding has been initiated based 
on the criminal case. The Petitioner apprehends that in case he 
will be punished in the Departmental Proceedings, it may cause 
prejudicial effect on him as there is every likelihood that the 
punishment in the Departmental Proceeding may affect the 
criminal trial. 
 
III. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE O.Ps/ STATE: 
10. Per contra, learned counsel for the Opposite Parties/ State 
submitted that the Petitioner has filed the present Writ Petition 
praying for a direction to the Opposite Parties not to publish the 
result of the Departmental Proceeding No.7 of 2016 till 
completion of the criminal trial in C.T. Case No.59 of 2016 
pending before the learned Sessions Judge, Jagatsinghpur as

Page 6 of 11 
 
both the proceedings arise out of the same fact and cause of 
action. 
11.  He further submitted that the relief sought for by the Petitioner 
is not appropriate/desirable as per the provision of Orissa 
Government General Circular bearing No.29 S.A.T. dated 
28.08.1962 issued by P and S Department, Government of 
Orissa. In the instant case, the action of the Opposite Parties/ 
State in publishing the result of the Departmental Proceeding is 
not likely to cause any embarrassment to the Petitioner and 
prejudicially affect the criminal proceeding. He further 
submitted that the criminal proceeding and the departmental 
proceeding though stand on same footing, they do not involve 
complicated question of law and facts. It was also submitted 
that the departmental proceeding and the criminal case can 
proceed simultaneously since separate standard of proof is 
required in both the cases. In the criminal case, the standard of 
proof is “Beyond Reasonable Doubts” while in the departmental 
proceeding the facts can be proved by “p reponderance of 
probabilities”. Therefore, the prayer sought by the Petitioner is 
not maintainable.  
12.  He further submitted that the apprehension of the Petitioner 
that result of the Departmental Proceeding would prejudicially 
affect the criminal case is misplaced and premature one. Both 
the cases would be decided on its own merit and on different

Page 7 of 11 
 
standard in so far the burden of proof is concerned. The claim of 
the Petitioner is based on presumption and no cause of action 
arises for the relief sought for by the Petitioner. In view of the 
above, he submitted that this Writ Petition may be dismissed 
being devoid of merit.  
IV. COURT’S ANALYSIS AND ORDER: 
13.  The purpose of Departmental proceedings and criminal trial are 
different. The criminal prosecution is conducted because of an 
offence committed due to act of commission in violation of law 
or omission of public duty. On the other hand, the departmental 
enquiry is initiated in order to maintain discipline and efficiency 
in public service. It is expedient to conduct and complete the 
departmental proceeding as expeditiously as possible. 
Departmental proceeding was initiated as against the Petitioner 
so also a criminal trial based on the same facts as stated by the 
prosecution. The Petitioner has filed the present Writ Petition 
before this Court praying to stay the department proceeding.  
14.  In the case of Depot Manager A.P. State, Road Transport 
Corporation v. Mohd. Yousuf Miya & Ors .1, the Apex Court 
observed that there would be no prejudice in holding the 
departmental proceedings at par with the criminal trial. It 
would be inappropriate to give inflexible guidelines as to 
                                                 
1 (1997) 2 SCC 699

Page 8 of 11 
 
whether the departmental proceedings and the criminal trial 
could take place simultaneously or it shall be rather stayed. This 
has to be determined in the backdrop of the facts and 
circumstances of each case at hand. 
15.  The pendency of a criminal trial is not a bar in conducting a 
departmental inquiry. It is neither a contempt of Court nor the 
violation of natural justice. It is not a mandate under the 
principle of natural justice for the employer to wait until the trial 
court has taken a decision on the criminal proceeding before 
conducting a departmental enquiry. The power of taking 
disciplinary action is vested with the disciplinary authority and 
the court shall not interfere with it as it is entirely an executive 
process. So, the court, whether in cases of criminal or civil does 
not hold power to intervene in such processes. Hence, initiating 
a departmental proceeding and continuing it at par with the 
criminal trial in good faith do not amount to the obstruction and 
hindrance in the course of justice in the pending trial. The same 
has been reiterated by the Supreme Court in Delhi Cloth & 
General Mills Ltd. Vs. Kushal Bhan 2 and in Jang Bahadur Singh 
Vs. Baij NathTiwari 3. Further, in Delhi Cloth & General Mills 
Ltd. (supra) it was held even if the disciplinary committee 
                                                 
2 AIR 1960 SC 806 
3 AIR 1969 SC 30

Page 9 of 11 
 
declares the accused as not guilty, the result of the criminal trial 
remains unaffected and it does not evade his chances of 
conviction. Hence, the enquiry officer can continue his 
investigation despite the ongoing criminal trial against the 
accused person and the final result, whether guilty or not, can 
be published, which is independent from the criminal trial not 
prejudicing the accused, even if the disciplinary committee rules 
in his favour. 
16.  In Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. and Ors. –vrs.- 
Sarvesh Berry4, the Apex Court held that: 
“The purpose of departmental enquiry and of 
prosecution is two different and distinct aspects. The 
criminal prosecution is launched for an offence for 
violation of a duty the offender owes to the society, 
or for breach of which law has provided that the 
offender shall make satisfaction to the public. So 
crime is an act of commission in violation of law or 
of omission of public duty. The departmental 
enquiry is to maintain discipline in the service and 
efficiency of public service. It would, therefore, be 
expedient that the disciplinary proceedings are 
conducted and completed as expeditiously as 
possible. It is not, therefore, desirable to lay down 
any guidelines as inflexible rules in which the 
departmental proceedings may or may not be stayed 
pending trial in criminal case against the delinquent 
officer. Each case requires to be considered in the 
backdrop of its own facts and circumstances. There 
would be no bar to proceed simultaneously with 
                                                 
4 (2005) 10 SCC 471

Page 10 of 11 
 
departmental enquiry and trial of a criminal case 
unless the charge in the criminal trial is of grave 
nature involving complicated questions of fact and 
law. Offence generally implies infringement of 
public duty, as distinguished from mere private 
rights punishable under criminal law. When trial for 
criminal offence is conducted it should be in 
accordance with proof of the offence as per the 
evidence defined under the provisions of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (in short the ‘Evidence Act’. 
Converse is the case of departmental enquiry. The 
enquiry in a departmental proceedings relates to 
conduct or breach of duty of the delinquent officer to 
punish him for his misconduct defined under the 
relevant statutory rules or law. That the strict 
standard of proof or applicability of the Evidence 
Act stands excluded is a settled legal position. 
Under these circumstances, what is required to be 
seen is whether the department enquiry would 
seriously prejudice the delinquent in his defence at 
the trial in a criminal case. It is always a question of 
fact to be considered in each case depending on its 
own facts and circumstances.” 
17.  This Court is of the opinion that the present matter does not 
involve complicated questions of facts and law and, therefore, it 
is believed that both the disciplinary proceedings and criminal 
trial can proceed simultaneously. Additionally, in the present 
circumstances, it does not seem that earlier completion of 
disciplinary proceedings will prejudice the criminal trial against 
the Petitioner. In light of the aforesaid discussion and having

Page 11 of 11 
 
regard to the present position of law, this Court is not inclined 
to allow the prayer of the present Petitioner.  
18.  Accordingly, this Writ Petition is dismissed. No order as to 
costs.  
 
 
Sd/-Dr. S.K. Panigrahi, J. 
 
Orissa High Court, Cuttack, 
Dated the 3rd July , 2023/B. Jhankar 
 
 
True Copy 
 
 
 
AR-cum-Sr. Secretary