Page 1 of 9 
CRLA No.709 of 2016 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK 
CRLA No.709 of 2016  
In the matter of an Appeal under section-374(2) of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 and from the judgment of c onviction and 
order of sentence dated 06.04.2013 passed by the le arned Sessions 
Judge, Nabarangpur in Criminal Trial No.92 of 2011. 
---- 
 
Kasa Santa & Another …. 
          
Appellants 
 
-versus- 
State of Odisha  …. Respondent 
Appeared in this case by Hybrid Arrangement 
(Virtual/Physical Mode: 
================================================= 
 For Appellants - Mr. P. Rama Krishna Patra, 
     Advocate. 
 For Respondent  -  Mr. S.S. Kanungo,  
     Additional Government Advocate 
CORAM: 
MR. JUSTICE D.DASH 
DR. JUSTICE S.K. PANIGRAHI 
Date of Hearing : 19.05.2023  : Date of Judgment:21 .06.2023
 
D.Dash,J.  The Appellants, by filing this Appeal, have challen ged the 
judgment of conviction and order of sentence dated 06.04.2013 
passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Nabarangpur i n Criminal Trial 
No.92 of 2011 arising out of G.R. Case No.511 of 20 11 
corresponding to Tentulikhunti P.S. Case No.67 of 2 011 of the Court 
of learned Sub-Divisional Judicial Magistrate (S.D. J.M.), 
Nabarangpur.

{{ 2 }} 
 
Page 2 of 9 
CRLA No.709 of 2016 
 
  By the same, the Appellants (accused persons) hav e been 
convicted for commission of offence under section-3 02/34 of the 
Indian Penal Code (for short called as ‘the IPC’). Accordingly, they 
have been sentenced to undergo imprisonment for lif e and pay fine of 
Rs.5,000/- each, in default to undergo rigorous imp risonment for one 
year each.  
2. The prosecution case is that on 13.08.2011 one Sa dan Santa, 
who is the nephew of the Informant namely, Jayaram Santa (P.W.2) 
enquired from the accused persons as to why they ha d assaulted his 
wife on the day of last “Uansa”. At this, the accus ed persons who are 
two brothers got annoyed, they went to the house of  the deceased, 
dragged him out to the courtyard and assaulted him by means of a 
thenga. It is also stated that when he fell on the ground, the accused 
persons threw a stone on his belly. After the said incident, a meeting 
had been convened in the village where the accused persons confessed 
to have committed the said act. At that time, the local gentries decided 
to put a full stop to the matter. However, as the c ondition of the 
deceased became serious and he was shifted to Nabar angpur Hospital 
for treatment and there he died on 18.08.2011; the Informant (P.W.2) 
lodged a written report with the Sub-Inspector (SI)  of Police attached 
to Tentulikhunti Police Station, who, in the absenc e of Inspector-In-
Charge (IIC) of the Police Station, was in charge o f the P.S. This S.I. 
of police (P.W.19) receiving the said written repor t from P.W.2 
treated the same as F.I.R. and registering the case , took up 
investigation.   
3. In course of investigation, the I.O. (P.W.19) exa mined the 
Informant (P.W.2) and other witnesses. He had held inquest over the

{{ 3 }} 
 
Page 3 of 9 
CRLA No.709 of 2016 
 
dead body of the deceased and prepared inquest repo rt, Ext.4. He sent 
the dead body of Sadan Santa for postmortem examina tion. 
Proceeding to the spot, he searched for accused per sons apprehending 
them. He also seized some incriminating articles in cluding the stick. 
On completion of investigation, the I.O.(P.W.19) su bmitted the Final 
Form, placing the accused persons to face the Trial  for commission of 
offence under Section-302/34 of the IPC.  
4. The learned SDJM, Nabarangpur having received the  Final 
Form as above took cognizance of said offence and a fter observing 
the formalities, committed the case to the Court of  Sessions. That is 
how the Trial commenced by framing the charge for t he said offence 
against the accused.   
5. In the Trial, the prosecution has examined in tot al nineteen (19) 
witnesses, who are P.W.1 to P.W.19. As already stat ed, the Informant 
who is the uncle of the deceased has been examined as P.W.2 and 
P.W.3 is the Sarapanch of the village; whereas the wife of the 
deceased has come to the witness box as P.W.4, thei r son is P.W.5 
and their daughter is P.W.13. The scribe of the F.I.R. lodged by P.W.2 
has been examined as P.W.6. The Doctor who had cond ucted autopsy 
over the dead body of the deceased has been examine d at first as 
P.W.1. The Investigating Officer has come to the wi tness box as 
P.W.19.  
  The prosecution besides leading the evidence by e xamining the 
above witnesses has also proved several documents w hich have been 
admitted in evidence and marked Exts.1 to 13. Out of those as already 
stated the F.I.R., Ext.3 and the inquest report and  postmortem report 
have been marked Exts.1 to 4 respectively and the b ed head ticket is

{{ 4 }} 
 
Page 4 of 9 
CRLA No.709 of 2016 
 
Ext.8. In the Trial, some incriminating articles ha ving been produced, 
as the Material Objects, those are M.O.I to M.O.III.  
6. The plea of the defence is that of complete denial and false 
implication. The accused persons have examined three witnesses from 
their side, who are D.Ws.1 to 3.  
 7. The Trial Court on going through the evidence of t he Doctor, 
P.W.1, who had conducted autopsy over the dead body  of the 
deceased and his report, Ext.1 as well as the evide nce of P.Ws. 2, 4, 5 
and 13 as also the I.O.-P.W.19, who had held inques t over the dead 
body of the deceased and prepared the report to tha t effect as Ext.4 
has arrived at a conclusion that the death of Sanda n Santa was 
homicidal in nature. In fact this aspect was not un der challenge before 
the Trial Court and that is also the situation before us.  
  It has been stated by P.W.1 that he had noted the  following 
injuries:- 
 “(A) External Injuries: 
i)  Abrasion of size 1/4 
!! X 1/4 !!  on the left shoulder, 
ii)  One bruise of size 4 !!  X 6 !!  on the left upper abdomen,  
iii)  Left eye blacken, conjecture of eye red in colour,  
 The above injuries were simple in nature. 
(B) Internal Injuries: 
i)  Peritoneum was full of blood, 
ii)  Small intestine distended with tears,  
iii)  Liver was ruptured,  
iv)  Spleen ruptured,  
v)  Left kidney blacken.” 
  He has stated that all the above injuries are ant e-mortem in 
nature and the death was caused due to trauma to ab domen for the 
injuries in the abdominal organs and bleeding into peritoneum. He has 
also noted all these above in detail in his report,  Ext.4. The

{{ 5 }} 
 
Page 5 of 9 
CRLA No.709 of 2016 
 
Investigating Officer, P.W.19 has also noted the in juries which had 
also seen over the dead body and those have been re flected in his 
report, Ext.4. Other witnesses have also stated tha t they had seen the 
deceased with injuries and he was taken to the hosp ital and while 
undergoing treatment, there had died. With such evi dence on record 
which have not been questioned, we without least he sitation concur 
with the view taken by the Trial Court that Sadan Santa met homicidal 
death resulting from the injuries received by him.    
8. Learned Counsel for the Appellants from the begin ning instead 
of impeaching the finding of the Trial Court as reg ards the role played 
by the accused persons in assaulting deceased and t he act done 
confined his submission as to conversion of the conviction to one under 
section 304-II of the I.P.C. He contended that even  accepting the 
prosecution case as emerged from the evidence of th e witnesses 
examined on its behalf as well as the medical evide nce tendered by 
P.W.1 and regard being had to the report Ext.1, whe n the other 
circumstances stand that the death took place on 18 .08.2011 as against 
the incident which had happened on 13.08.2011, the Trial Court ought 
not to have convicted the accused persons for the o ffence punishable 
under section 302 of the I.P.C. He further submitte d that the 
prosecution evidence being accepted in entirety do not go to show that 
the accused persons had the intention to cause the death and rather the 
facts and circumstances of the case clearly go to s how that they totally 
negate the case of intention. He thus submitted tha t it is a fit case for 
alteration of the conviction to one under section-3 04-Part-II of the IPC 
warranting and appropriate reduction of sentence. H e submitted that 
even accepting the prosecution evidence as placed; the accused persons

{{ 6 }} 
 
Page 6 of 9 
CRLA No.709 of 2016 
 
would at best be held liable for committing the off ence under section-
304 Part-II of the IPC but not under section-302 of  the IPC and 
accordingly they be made to suffer the sentence as commensurate the 
crime. 
9. Learned Counsel for the Respondent-State contende d all in 
favour of the finding of the Trial Court holding th e accused persons 
guilty for commission of offence under section-302/ 34 of the IPC. He 
submitted that merely because the death has taken p lace five days after 
the incident, when the injuries received by the dec eased are taken into 
account and the manner in which those had been caus ed by the accused 
persons, they cannot wriggle out for their criminal  liability for 
commission of offence under section-302 of the IPC. 
 10 .  Keeping in view the submissions made; we have ca refully read 
the judgment of conviction. We have also extensivel y travelled 
through the depositions of all the witnesses i.e. P .W.1 to P.W.19 and 
have perused the documents which have been marked as Exts.1 to 13.  
 11. In order to appreciate the rival submission, as for  what offence 
the accused persons for their said act against the deceased and the role 
played by them would be liable for, we shall have t o go through the 
evidence of the prosecution witnesses. 
  P.W.2 has stated that on the relevant evening, he  had seen the 
accused persons assaulting the deceased by means of  lathi and stone. 
It is stated that accused Lai Santa assaulted by means of lathi where as 
accused Kasa Santa by a stone. He further states th at they assaulted 
the deceased, dragging him to the village road from  his cowshed, 
which had been seen by the wife and son of the dece ased. The FIR

{{ 7 }} 
 
Page 7 of 9 
CRLA No.709 of 2016 
 
version was slightly exaggerated that these two acc used persons, after 
assaulting the deceased, thrashed him on the ground  and then gave 
blows by the stone on the belly. 
  The wife of the deceased (P.W.4) has stated that the accused 
persons dragged her husband to the road and accused  Lai Santa 
assaulted the deceased by means of lathi where as D adar @ Kasa 
assaulted the deceased and pressed the abdomen of t he deceased by 
means of stone. It has also been the evidence of P. W.5 (son of the 
deceased) that accused Lai assaulted by means of la thi whereas the 
accused Kasa by stone. The evidence of P.W.13, the daughter of the 
deceased is however to the effect that both the acc used persons 
assaulted by means of thenga.  
 12.  The evidence goes to show that the deceased after the incident 
was kept at home for two days and thereafter taken to the hospital. 
The incident having taken place on 13.08.2011, he w as taken to 
Hospital on 15.08.2011. The Doctor (P.W.1), who had  conducted 
autopsy over the dead body of the deceased states i s that the death is 
due to trauma to abdomen causing injury to abdomina l organs and 
bleeding into peritoneum. It is not stated by any o f the witnesses that 
the stone was threshed upon the belly of the deceas ed from a height 
and thus with force. Most of the witnesses when gen erally say that 
deceased was assaulted by stone. P.W. 1 has externa lly noticed only 
one bruise on the left upper abdomen. He, however, on dissection has 
found the peritoneum to be full of blood, small int estine distended 
with tears and liver was ruptured. P.W. 2 does not show that the hit, 
with the stone, was hit on the abdomen and it is the evidence of P.W.4 
that the abdomen of the deceased was pressed by mea ns of stone.

{{ 8 }} 
 
Page 8 of 9 
CRLA No.709 of 2016 
 
When the weight of the seized stone is said to be 1 0 kgs as assessed 
by P.W.1, he except noticing one bruise over the sa id left upper 
abdomen has not noted any other external injury on that area. The 
deceased on one hand and accused on the other were not pulling on 
well which have been indicated in the F.I.R. citing  prior incident 
wherein the accused persons had assaulted the wife of the deceased, 
that is now not stated by any of the witnesses and it is also not stated 
by P.W.2 as to how the occurrence began and what was the immediate 
reason for the accused persons being enraged and en tered into the 
house. The death has taken place after five days of  the occurrence. 
The accused persons hail from rural background and from scheduled 
area. This P.W.1, having conducted the autopsy, has , however, stated 
that the external injury and internal injury are su fficient to cause 
death. 
  With all these above, when the injury is judged o bjectively 
from the nature of it and other opinion of P.W.1, t he Court cannot 
draw an inference that the intended injury caused with the intention of 
causing such bodily injury by the accused persons, which was 
sufficient in ordinary course of nature to cause de ath so as to attract 
clause (3) of section 300 of the I.P.C.  
  Taking a cumulative view of all these above circu mstances, this 
Court is of the view that the offence could be prop erly categorized as 
one punishable under section-304 Part-I of the IPC.  We are thus of the 
considered opinion that for the role played by the accused persons, they 
would be liable for conviction under section-304 Part-I of the IPC.  
13. In that view of the matter, the conviction is alt ered to one under 
section 304 Part-I of the IPC and consequently, the  Appellants

{{ 9 }} 
 
Page 9 of 9 
CRLA No.709 of 2016 
 
(accused persons) are sentenced to undergo rigorous  imprisonment for 
a period of ten (10) years and pay fine of Rs.5,000 /- (Rupees Five 
Thousand) each in default to undergo rigorous impri sonment for one 
(1) year each.   
14. With the above modification as to the judgment of  conviction 
and order of sentence dated 6
th  April, 2013 passed by the learned 
Sessions Judge, Nabarangpur, in Criminal Trial No.9 2 of 2011, the 
Appeal stands disposed of.  
 
            (D. Dash), 
   Judge. 
 
 Dr. S.K. Panigrahi, J.  I Agree. 
 
       (Dr.S.K. Panigrahi), 
Judge. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Narayan