IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK 
JCRLA No. 37 OF 2019 
 
From judgment and order dated 14.08.2018 passed by the Addl. 
Sessions Judge -cum- Special Judge, Sundargarh in S pecial G.R. 
Case No.15 of 2013. 
 
 ----------------------------  
 
 Santanu Kaudi .......              Appellant 
 
 -Versus- 
 State of Odisha    .......                          Respondent 
  
For Appellant:       -    Mr. Akhaya Kumar Beura 
     Amicus Curiae 
                                            
              For Respondent:         -    Mr. Priyabrata Tripathy 
            Addl. Standing Counsel 
 
 
 ----------------------------  
                                         
P R E S E N T:  
    
 
    THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K. SAHOO 
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------      
  Date of Hearing and Judgment: 05.07.2023 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
             
S.K. SAHOO, J .   The appellant Santanu Kaudi was initially charg ed on 
14.05.2014 for commission of offences under section s 
376(i)/506 of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter, ‘ I.P.C.’), 
section 3(2)(v) of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled T ribes 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (hereafter ‘19 89 Act’) and 
section 4 of the Protection of Children from Sexual  Offences Act, 
2012 (hereinafter ‘POCSO Act’) by the learned Sessi ons Judge

// 2 // 
 
Page 2 of 22 
 
-cum- Special Judge, Sundargarh in Special G.R. Cas e No.15 of 
2013. In the midst of trial, the case was transferr ed to the Court 
of Additional Sessions Judge -cum- Sessions Judge, Sundargarh 
where the trial proceeded. After examination of the  prosecution 
witnesses and also recording of the accused stateme nt, charge 
was re-framed under sections 376(2)(n)/506 of the I .P.C., 
section 3(2)(v) of 1989 Act and section 6 of the POCSO Act.   
   The learned trial Court vide impugned judgment a nd 
order dated 14.08.2018, while acquitting the appell ant of the 
charges under section 3(2)(v) of the 1989 Act and s ection 6 of 
POCSO Act, found him guilty of the offences punisha ble under 
sections 376(2)(n)/506 of I.P.C. and sentenced him to undergo 
rigorous imprisonment for ten years and to pay a fi ne of 
Rs.10,000/- (rupees ten thousand), in default, to f urther 
undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year for the offence 
under section 376(2)(n) of the I.P.C. and rigorous imprisonment 
for a period of two years for the offence under sec tion 506 of the 
I.P.C. and both the substantive sentences were dire cted to run 
concurrently.    
2.   The father of the victim, namely, Baisakhu Mun da 
(P.W.2) lodged an F.I.R. before the Inspector-in-ch arge of Sadar 
police station, Sundargarh on 14.08.2013 stating therein that the 
victim was aged about seventeen years and she used to go to

// 3 // 
 
Page 3 of 22 
 
the jungle for grazing goats everyday and the appellant, who is a 
co-villager, also used to visit the jungle for the same purpose 
every day. By giving threat to the victim and also alluring her, 
the appellant used to keep physical relationship wi th the victim 
for which she became pregnant for seven months as o n the date 
of lodging of the F.I.R. It is also stated in the F .I.R. that the 
appellant was threatening the victim not to disclos e such act 
before anybody or else she would have to face dire 
consequences for which she did not disclose about t he incident 
before her family members. She was examined by the Asha 
Karmi, who found her pregnant and when she was aske d about 
the name of the person who made her pregnant, the v ictim 
disclosed the name of the appellant before the Asha Karmi. 
 On the written report presented by P.W.2, Ms. Iti Das 
(P.W.14), the Inspector-in-charge registered Sundar garh Sadar 
P.S. Case No.103 dated 14.08.2013 under sections 37 6/506 of 
the I.P.C. and directed Kuni Besra (P.W.16), the S. I. of Police, 
Sadar P.S., Sundargarh to take up investigation of the case.  
 During the course of investigation, P.W.16 examine d 
the informant, the victim and other witnesses, seiz ed the 
wearing apparels of the victim under seizure list E xt.4. On 
15.08.2013, she visited the spot, prepared the spot  map 
(Ext.11) and on the same day, sent the victim for h er medical

// 4 // 
 
Page 4 of 22 
 
examination. Dr. Mrs. Lipika Dei (P.W.8), who was a ttached to 
the District Headquarters Hospital, Sundargarh as A ssistant 
Surgeon examined the victim and prepared the report  (Ext.6) 
wherein she gave a finding that the victim was havi ng pregnancy 
for thirty to thirty two weeks and possibility of c ommission of 
rape on the victim cannot be ruled out. The appella nt was 
arrested on 15.08.2013 and his wearing apparels wer e seized as 
per seizure list Ext.8 and then he was also sent fo r medical 
examination and P.W.11, the Medical Officer attache d to the 
District Headquarters Hospital, Sundargarh examined  the 
appellant and found that the appellant was capable of having 
sexual intercourse and accordingly, he prepared the  report vide 
Ext.7.  
 During the course of investigation, since as per t he 
statement of the victim and other witnesses, it was  ascertained 
that the case is one under sections 376(2)(n)/506 o f the I.P.C., 
section 3(2)(v) of 1989 Act and section 4 of the PO CSO Act, as 
per the order of the Superintendent of Police, Sund argarh, 
P.W.16 requested Sri P.K. Patel, (P.W.15), D.S.P., HRPC, 
Sundargarh to take up the charge of investigation on 15.08.2013 
and accordingly, P.W.16 handed over the charge of i nvestigation 
to P.W.15. After taking over charge of investigatio n, P.W.15 re-
examined the informant, the victim and other materi al

// 5 // 
 
Page 5 of 22 
 
witnesses, seized the biological materials of the a ppellant 
collected by the Medical Officer, which were produc ed before him 
as per the seizure list (Ext.9) and forwarded the a ppellant to the 
Court on 15.08.2013. The biological materials of th e victim were 
also seized on 16.08.2013 as per the seizure list ( Ext.5) and 
those were sent for chemical examination through Co urt. The 
admission register of Chakramal Sevashram School, w here the 
victim was prosecuting her studies, was initially seized by P.W.15 
and requisition was made to the Tahasildar, Tangarpali to furnish 
the caste certificate of the informant and also tha t of the 
appellant. He received the caste particulars from t he Tahasildar, 
Tangarpali and on completion of investigation, subm itted charge 
sheet under sections 376(1)/506 of the I.P.C., sect ion 3(2)(v) of 
1989 Act and section 4 of the POCSO Act against the  appellant 
on 10.10.2013. 
3.  The defence plea of the appellant is one of den ial.  
4.  During course of the trial, in order to prove i ts case, 
the prosecution examined as many as sixteen witnesses.  
  P.W.1 Sanjulata Patel is the Asha Karmi who 
examined the victim after which she came to know th at the 
victim was pregnant.

// 6 // 
 
Page 6 of 22 
 
  P.W.2 Baisakhu Munda is the father of the victim and 
also the informant in the case who lodged the writt en report at 
Sadar Police Station, Sudargarh, alleging therein t hat his 
daughter was sexually assaulted. 
  P.W.3 is the victim herself.  
  P.W.4 Rohit Kumar Patel is a co-villager of the 
informant, the scribe of the F.I.R. 
  P.W.5 Kishore Kumar Patel was the Headmaster of 
the school where the victim was prosecuting her studies. 
  P.W.6 Sunita Munda is the mother of the victim.   
  P.W.7 Menaka Patel who was the constable attached  
to Sadar police station, Sundargarh is a witness to  the seizure of 
wearing apparels vide Ext.4  as well as biological samples of the 
victim as per the seizure list Ext.5.  
  P.W.8 Dr. Lipika Dei, who was Assistant Surgeon 
attached to the District Headquarters Hospital, Sun dargarh 
examined the victim on police requisition and submi tted her 
report vide Ext.6.  
  P.W.9 Swetalina Patnaik was the teacher of the 
school where the victim was prosecuting her studies  and she is a 
witness to the seizure of school admission register  as per seizure 
list Ext.2.

// 7 // 
 
Page 7 of 22 
 
  P.W.10 Manoj Panda who was the Ward Member of 
the village of the informant stated that on the req uest made by 
the Asha Karmi, he convened a panch meeting whereaf ter, he 
advised the parents of the victim to report the mat ter to the 
police.  
  P.W.11 Dr. Sagar Dalei was the Medical Officer 
attached to the District Headquarters Hospital, Sun dargarh, who 
examined the appellant on police requisition and su bmitted his 
report as per Ext.7. 
  P.W.12 Kalipada Oram who was the police constable  
attached to Sadar police station, Sundargarh is a w itness to the 
seizure of wearing apparels of the appellant as per  seizure list 
vide Ext.8 and the envelopes containing the biological samples of 
the appellant as per the seizure list Ext.9.  
  P.W.13 Niranjan Guria was the retired Havildar of  
police is a witness to the seizure of envelopes as per seizure list 
Ext.9.  
  P.W.14 Iti Das was the Inspector-in-Charge of 
Sundargarh Police Station who registered the case o n the report 
of P.W.2 and directed P.W.16 to take up the investigation.  
  P.W.15 Promod Kumar Patel was the D.S.P., 
H.R.P.C., Sundargarh who was handed over the charge  of

// 8 // 
 
Page 8 of 22 
 
investigation from P.W.16 pursuant to the order of the 
Superintendent of Police, Sundargarh. 
  P.W.16 Kuni Besra, who was the Sub-Inspector of 
Police attached to the Sadar Police Station, Sundar garh was the 
initial Investigating Officer of the case. 
  The prosecution also proved thirteen documents 
through exhibits. Ext.1 is the F.I.R., Ext.1/3 is t he formal F.I.R., 
Exts.2, 4, 5, 8, and 9 are the seizure lists, Ext.3  is the 
zimanama, Exts.6 and 7 are the medical examination reports of 
the victim and the appellant respectively, Ext.10 i s the caste 
certificate of the victim, Ext.11 is the spot map, Exts.12 and 13 
are the medical requisitions of the victim and the appellant 
respectively. 
  The appellant neither examined any witness nor 
proved any document. 
5. The learned trial Court after analyzing the oral  and 
documentary evidence on record came to hold that th e 
prosecution evidence clearly revealed that the vict im was raped 
by the appellant many a times while they used to vi sit jungle for 
grazing goats and livestock. The learned trial Cour t further held 
that the victim’s parents were illiterate and the s chool admission 
register has not been produced and proved in the Co urt. No

// 9 // 
 
Page 9 of 22 
 
horoscope or date of birth of the victim was seized  and the 
victim’s father (P.W.2) has stated the age of the victim as per his 
guess and accordingly, it was held that the prosecution has failed 
to prove the date of birth of the victim. The ossif ication test 
disclosed that the age of the victim to be around 1 6-17 years 
and if a variation is taken into account in the hig her side, the 
victim would be more than eighteen years of age and  as such, it 
was held that the prosecution has failed to prove t hat the victim 
was less than eighteen years of age as on the date of alleged 
date of rape. Accordingly, the offence under sectio n 6 of the 
POCSO Act could not be proved against the appellant . It was 
further held that the victim was an illiterate girl  and belonged to 
labour class scheduled tribe family. The incident t ook place 
inside the jungle while she used to graze the goats  and as such, 
the consent of the victim, if any, to the act of th e appellant was 
under misconception of fact and such consent cannot  be 
construed to be a valid consent. The learned trial Court further 
held that the prosecution has been able to prove th e charge 
under section 376(2)(n) of the I.P.C. as the appell ant was 
committing rape on the victim regularly by which sh e became 
pregnant and a male child was born to her. Since th e evidence 
on record indicates that the appellant had committed rape on the 
victim by giving threat to kill her and her parents  if she would

// 10 // 
 
Page 10 of 22 
 
disclose the incident to others, the victim could n ot disclose the 
same before her parents out of fear till she became pregnant and 
her pregnancy was ascertained by the Asha Karmi (P. W.1) and 
hence, the offence under section 506 of the I.P.C. is established. 
The learned trial Court further held that even thou gh the victim 
belonged to S.T. category as per the case particula rs furnished 
by the Tahasildar, Tangarpali and the accused belon ged to 
‘Gouda’ by caste, which comes under SEBC category, however, it 
was held that there is no evidence that the appella nt committed 
rape on the victim as because she was a member of S .T. and 
accordingly, it was held that the offence under sec tion 3(2)(v) of 
the 1989 Act is not proved against the appellant. 
6. Mr. A.K. Beura, learned Amicus Curiae appearing for 
the appellant contended that the prosecution has fa iled to prove 
that the victim was less than eighteen years of age  as on the 
alleged date of rape for which the appellant was ac quitted of the 
charge under section 6 of the POCSO Act, which has not been 
challenged before this Court. Since the victim was a major girl as 
on the date of occurrence, in view of her evidence that even 
though other persons were grazing the goats and cat tle nearby, 
she did not raise any hue and cry nor offered any r esistance to 
the act of the appellant and her evidence that she was having 
sexual intercourse with the appellant going deeper into the

// 11 // 
 
Page 11 of 22 
 
jungle almost every day would substantiate that she  was a 
consenting party and being fully aware that the app ellant, who 
was her co-villager, is a married man having wife a nd four 
children and the eldest child has already been give n in marriage, 
since she allowed the appellant to have sex with he r, it cannot 
be said that consent of the victim, if any, to the act of the 
appellant was under misconception of fact and that such consent 
cannot be construed to be a valid consent in the ey e of law as 
observed by the learned trial Court. Learned counse l further 
argued that even though the school admission regist er of the 
victim was seized by P.W.15, but for the best reaso ns known to 
the prosecution, the said register was not proved d uring trial. He 
further submitted that the prosecution has not taken any step for 
conducting the DNA test to determine the paternity aspect of the 
child of the victim and therefore, it is a fit case  where benefit of 
doubt should be extended in favour of the appellant.  
 Mr. Priyabrata Tripathy, learned Additional Standi ng 
Counsel, on the other hand, submitted that no appea l has been 
filed by the State challenging the order of acquitt al of the 
appellant under sections 3(2)(v) of the 1989 Act and section 6 of 
the POCSO Act. He however, submitted that the victi m has 
specifically stated how she was dragged deeper into  the jungle 
and raped forcefully against her will and without h er consent by

// 12 // 
 
Page 12 of 22 
 
the appellant and how the appellant threatened her not to 
disclose about the incident before anybody. Learned  counsel 
further argued that the reasons given by the victim  for non-
disclosing the act committed by the appellant befor e her family 
members appears to be satisfactory. Further, the ac t of the 
appellant came to the fore when she was found to be  pregnant 
and her belly started bulging gradually. Learned co unsel further 
submitted that P.W.1, who was the Asha Karmi with t he 
approved Government supply kits conducted the test known as 
‘Mixture test’ with the urine of the victim and fro m the result of 
the test, she came to the conclusion that the victi m was 
pregnant and the victim disclosed before her that t he appellant 
was responsible for her pregnancy. Learned counsel for the State 
further argued that before her father (P.W.2) and m other 
(P.W.6), the victim disclosed that the appellant wa s responsible 
behind her pregnancy and the doctor (P.W.8) who exa mined her 
on 15.08.2013 also stated that the ultrasound exami nation was 
conducted and it was found that the victim was preg nant for 
thirty to thirty-two weeks. It is argued that in vi ew of the 
available materials on record, it is clear that the  appellant not 
only committed rape on the victim, but also threate ned her not 
to disclose before any one for which the victim bec ame pregnant 
and delivered a child and therefore, the learned tr ial Court has

// 13 // 
 
Page 13 of 22 
 
rightly held the appellant guilty under sections 37 6(2)(n) and 
506 of the Indian Penal Code and thus, the appeal b eing devoid 
of merits, should be dismissed. 
Age of the Victim 
 : 
7. Adverting to the contentions raised by the learn ed 
counsel for both the parties, so far as the age of the victim is 
concerned, it is no doubt true that when the victim  (P.W.3) was 
examined on 1st May 2015 in the learned trial Court , she stated 
her age to be seventeen years and further stated th at the 
incident in question took place in the year 2013 and the father of 
the victim being examined as P.W.2 has stated that P.W.3 was 
born in the year 1996 and the mother of the victim stated that 
the victim was aged about sixteen years at the time  of the 
incident, however, it appears that the I.O. (P.W.15 ) seized the 
school admission register of Chakramal Sevashram Sc hool Vol. 
IV with effect from 1996 to 2008 in which the victi m is shown to 
have been admitted in Class-I of the Sevashram scho ol on 
03.07.2002 vide Sl.No.1/498/2002 and her age has be en 
mentioned to be six years and twenty three days. Th e 
Headmaster of Chakramal Sevashram School being exam ined as 
P.W.5 also stated about seizure of the school admis sion register 
by the police as per seizure list (Ext.2) and furth er stated to 
have taken the admission register in zima by execut ing

// 14 // 
 
Page 14 of 22 
 
zimanama (Ext.3), but the prosecution did not take any step to 
call for the admission register during the trial of  the case to 
prove the same, particularly the page where the dat e of birth of 
the victim has been mentioned. This is, certainly, a lacuna in the 
prosecution case. Admittedly, the birth certificate  of the victim 
has not been proved. Since one of the charge under which the 
appellant is being prosecuted at the initial stage was under 
section 4 of the POCSO Act, which was subsequently altered to 
one under section 6 of the POCSO Act and for such o ffence, it 
was the requirement on the part of the prosecution to prove that 
the victim was a ‘child’ as per the definition prov ided in section 
2(1)(d) of the POCSO Act, the date of birth entry i n the school 
admission register would have been the vital factor to be proved. 
It appears that on account of the laches on the par t of the 
prosecution, the same could not be done even though  it was 
seized and given in the zima of the Headmaster of t he School, 
who was examined as P.W.5. 
 The learned trial Court while assessing the age of  the 
victim girl has observed that the school admission register was 
not proved and the victim girl was an illiterate on e and neither 
her horoscope nor her birth certificate was produce d in the 
school while admitting her into the school and also, no horoscope 
or birth certificate of the victim has been seized by the I.O. The

// 15 // 
 
Page 15 of 22 
 
evidence of the father of the victim as P.W.2 regar ding the age 
of the victim was as per his guess work and the evi dence of the 
doctor revealed that according to the ossification test, the age of 
the victim was 16-18 years. However, for such test,  the error 
margin of two years on either side is generally tak en into 
consideration. Further, the X-ray plate has not bee n produced in 
the Court basing on which the ossification test rep ort was 
prepared and if the variation would be taken into c onsideration 
on the higher side, the victim would be more than e ighteen 
years. Accordingly, the learned trial Court came to  hold that the 
prosecution has failed to prove that the victim was  less than 
eighteen years of age as on the date of commission of rape and 
therefore, the offence under the POCSO Act has not been proved 
against the appellant. The prosecution has not chal lenged the 
order of acquittal of the appellant under section 6  of the POCSO 
Act. The conclusion arrived at by the learned trial  Court that the 
victim was more than eighteen years of age at the t ime of 
occurrence, according to me, is quite justified. 
Evidence of the victim 
 : 
8. The victim in her examination-in-chief has state d 
that she used to graze cattle in the nearby jungle of her village 
and the appellant, who is a married man was having four 
children and the eldest one having given in marriag e and he was

// 16 // 
 
Page 16 of 22 
 
also grazing his livestock in the same manner in th e jungle and 
that the appellant one day came to her, dragged her  deeper into 
the jungle and raped her against her will and conse nt. She 
further stated that the appellant forcibly made her  lie down on 
the ground, removed her chadi and forcibly committe d sexual 
intercourse with her and threatened her not to disc lose the 
incident before anybody or else, he would kill her as well as her 
parents for which she did not venture to disclose a bout the 
incident before anybody till her pregnancy was dete cted by the 
Asha Karmi. She further stated that the appellant u sed to 
forcibly sexually intercourse with her in the jungle many a times. 
However, in the cross-examination, she stated that the spot, 
where she was raped, was inside the jungle which wa s situated 
at a distance of half an hour journey from the vill age locality. 
She further stated that almost all the cattle grazers of her village 
took their respective cattle for grazing into the j ungle including 
herself. She further stated that the appellant alon g with four 
cattle grazers used to graze their cattle inside th at jungle. She 
further stated that those cattle grazers did not kn ow the overt 
act committed by the appellant on her inasmuch as h e and the 
appellant were having sexual intercourse going deep er into the 
jungle and almost all the days, the appellant used to have sexual 
intercourse with her in the jungle and at no point of time, she

// 17 // 
 
Page 17 of 22 
 
had raised any hue and cry nor offered resistance. She further 
stated not to have disclosed about the sexual inter course by the 
appellant with her to anybody else even before her parents. She 
further stated that at the Anganwadi Center of her village, she 
entered her name being the mother of the child but the name of 
the father of the child was not mentioned.  
 Thus, the victim being a major girl seems to be go ing 
along with the appellant deeper into the jungle and  used to have 
sexual intercourse with him every day knowing full well that the 
appellant was a married person having four children  and the 
eldest one was given in marriage. She did not raise  any 
objection to the act of the appellant nor even disc losed before 
anyone against the appellant about the sexual inter course. The 
appellant never promised her to marry. She also kne w that 
marriage with the appellant was not possible as the  appellant 
was a married person having been blessed with child ren. 
Therefore, in my humble view, she was a consenting party. The 
learned trial Court held that the consent of the vi ctim, if any, to 
the act of the appellant was under misconception of  fact and 
such consent obtained cannot be construed to be val id consent. 
According to Cambridge Dictionary, ‘misconception’ is an idea 
that is wrong because it has been based on a failur e to 
understand a situation. Section 90 of the Indian Pe nal Code

// 18 // 
 
Page 18 of 22 
 
provides any consent given under a misconception of  fact, would 
not be considered as valid consent so far as the pr ovision under 
section 375 I.P.C. is concerned and thus, such a ph ysical 
relationship would tantamount to committing rape. T he consent 
of a woman under section 375 I.P.C. is vitiated on the ground of 
a misconception of fact where such misconception wa s the basis 
for her choosing to engage in the said act. The con sent of a 
woman with respect to section 375 I.P.C. must invol ve an active 
and reasoned deliberation towards the proposed act.  It must 
denote an active will in the mind of the woman to p ermit the 
doing of an act complained of. In the factual scena rio, it cannot 
be said that the consent that was given by the vict im was under 
misconception of fact for which it cannot be constr ued to be a 
valid consent as observed by the learned trial Cour t. The victim 
(P.W.3) did not resist to the act committed by the appellant 
every day. She was freely exercising her choice in accompanying 
the appellant deep into the jungle to have sexual a ct being 
conscious of the fact that their marriage was not possible. All the 
circumstances lead to the conclusion that she freel y, voluntarily 
and consciously consented to having sexual intercou rse with the 
appellant and her consent was not the consequence o f any 
misconception of fact.

// 19 // 
 
Page 19 of 22 
 
 The learned trial Court has also taken into accoun t 
the provision under section 114-A of the Indian Evi dence Act 
which states about presumption as to the absence of  consent in 
certain prosecution for rape. This presumption is n ot conclusive 
but rebuttable and the accused has to rebut the same by proving 
that his sexual act with the prosecutrix was with h er consent. 
Merely because the victim of rape said that she did  not consent 
to the sexual act is not sufficient to convict the accused. The 
Court has to assess the entirety of evidence that c omes during 
trial to come to the just conclusion. Consent or ab sence of it 
could be gathered from the attendant circumstances.  The 
previous or contemporaneous acts or the subsequent conduct 
can be legitimate guides. Even in the absence of a specific 
defence plea of consent being taken by an accused c harged with 
the offence of rape, if the evidence on record indi cates that the 
victim was a consenting party, then the Court can t ake a view 
that sexual intercourse with the victim was not aga inst her will 
but with her consent. 
 Mr. Beura has rightly pointed out that the 
prosecution should have taken step for conducting t he DNA test 
to determine the paternity aspect of the child, whi ch would have 
strengthened the prosecution case that the appellan t was the 
father of the child whom the victim gave birth to.

// 20 // 
 
Page 20 of 22 
 
9. In view of the available materials on record and  
foregoing discussions, I am of the humble view that  the 
prosecution has failed to establish the charge unde r section 
376(2)(n) of the I.P.C. against the appellant. Thou gh the victim 
has stated during the first act committed by the ap pellant, he 
threatened her not to disclose the same before any one, but 
when she seems to be voluntarily accompanying the a ppellant 
deep into the jungle every day where they used to h ave sexual 
intercourse and she was not complaining before anyb ody nor 
raising any protest against the overt act committed  by the 
appellant nor disclosed before any one till she was  found 
pregnant for seven months by P.W.1, I am of the view that there 
is absence of cogent materials that the appellant c ommitted any 
act of criminal intimidation and therefore, the cha rge under 
section 506 of the I.P.C. is also not sustainable in the eye of law. 
10. When the matter was taken up for hearing on 
15.03.2023 and the evidence of the victim (P.W.3) w as placed, 
this Court directed the learned counsel for the Sta te to obtain 
instruction through the Inspector in-charge of Sada r Police 
Station, Sundargarh about the status of the victim and her male 
child and whether any compensation has been received by any of 
them and whether the victim has filed any maintenan ce case for 
herself and her child against the appellant in any Court.

// 21 // 
 
Page 21 of 22 
 
Accordingly, the learned counsel for the State has produced the 
written instruction today received from Inspector-i n-Charge of 
Sadar Police Station, Sundargarh wherein it is ment ioned that 
the Inspector-in-charge personally visited the house of the victim 
and found that she was living with her son and her father in her 
village and her son is now prosecuting his studies in Class-IV. It 
also revealed that the victim has received compensa tion under 
the Victim Compensation Scheme to the tune of Rs.1, 35,000/- 
(one lakh thirty five thousand) from the office of the District 
Welfare Officer, Sundargarh and for that the Inspec tor-in-charge 
also enquired about the matter of compensation from  the  office 
of the District Welfare Officer, Sundargarh and asc ertained that 
the victim has already received compensation amount  in three 
phases i.e. Rs.60,000/-, Rs.15,000/- and Rs.60,000/ -. The 
statement of account of the victim annexed by the I nspector-in-
Charge regarding payment of the aforesaid amount ha s been 
enclosed. The report is taken on record. 
11. In view of the foregoing discussions, I am of t he 
humble view that the prosecution has failed to esta blish the 
charges under sections 376(2)(n)/506 of the I.P.C. against the 
appellant and accordingly, he is acquitted of such charges. The 
appellant, who is in jail custody, be set at libert y forthwith if his 
detention is not required in any other case. Even t hough the

// 22 // 
 
Page 22 of 22 
 
appellant is acquitted, but the compensation amount  paid to the 
victim shall not be recovered from her. 
  Accordingly, the Jail Criminal Appeal is allowed.  
  Trial Court Records with a copy of this judgment be 
sent down to the learned trial Court.   
  Before parting with the case, I would like to put  on 
record my appreciation to Mr. A.K. Beura, the learn ed Amicus 
Curiae for rendering his valuable help and assistan ce towards 
arriving at the decision above mentioned. The learn ed Amicus 
Curiae shall be entitled to his professional fees w hich is fixed at 
Rs.7,500/- (rupees seven thousand five hundred only). 
                                                       
                                                    …………………………… 
                          S.K. Sahoo, J.  
              
Orissa High Court, Cuttack 
The 5
th  July 2023/PKSahoo