Page 1 of 12 
JCRLA No.38 of 2019 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK 
JCRLA No.38 of 2019 
In the matter of an Appeal under Section 383 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 and from the judgment of conviction 
and the order of sentence dated 22 nd January, 2019 passed by the 
learned Sessions Judge, Angul, in C.T. (s) No.181 of 2016. 
---- 
Kanduru Sahu  ….          Appellant 
 
-versus- 
State of Odisha  …. Respondent 
Appeared in this case by Hybrid Arrangement 
(Virtual/Physical Mode): 
 For Appellant - Mr.Swayamjit Rout 
     (Advocate) 
 For Respondent -  Mr.S.K. Nayak, 
     Additional Government Advocate 
CORAM: 
MR. JUSTICE D.DASH 
DR. JUSTICE S.K. PANIGRAHI 
Date of Hearing : 15.05.2023        :      Date of Judgment:21.06.2023 
D.Dash,J. The Appellant, by filing this Appeal from inside the jail, has 
called in question the judgment of conviction and the order of 
sentence dated 22 nd of January, 2019, in C.T. (s) No.181 of 2016 
arising out of G.R. Case No.365 of 2016 corresponding to

{{ 2 }} 
 
Page 2 of 12 
JCRLA No.38 of 2019 
 
Banarpal P.S. Case No.43 of 2016 of the Court of the learned Sub-
Divisional Judicial Magistrate (S.D.J.M.), Angul.  
  The Appellant (accused) thereunder has been convicted for 
committing the offence under section 302 of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 ( for short, 8the IPC9) and accordingly, he has been 
sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life and pay fine of 
Rs.10,000/- (Rupees Ten Thousand) in default to undergo 
rigorous imprisonment for one (1) year for the offence under 
section 302 IPC.   
2. Prosecution Case:- 
 On 21.03.2016, the accused had placed the mahua flowers in 
his courtyard under the sun for drying those. The cows of Jema 
Sahu (deceased), having entered into the courtyard of the 
accused, had eaten away those mahua flowers. The accused, 
therefore, had a quarrel with the deceased. On 22.03.2016 around 
6.30 a.m. in the morning, the accused arrived at the house of Jema  
carrying tangia (axe) and it is said that he assaulted Jema by 
means of tangia (axe) causing bleeding injuries on her head, back 
and neck. The son of Jema (Informant-P.W.1), receiving said 
information about the assault on his mother, rushed to the spot. 
The accused, seeing his mother, ran away carrying the tangia 
(axe) with him. Thereafter one ambulance was immediately 
called and Jema was shifted to the District Headquarters

{{ 3 }} 
 
Page 3 of 12 
JCRLA No.38 of 2019 
 
Hospital, Angul where she was declared dead. The Informant 
(P.W.1) then lodged the written report with the Inspector-in-
Charge (I.I.C.) of Banarpal. The I.I.C. having received the same, 
treated it as First Information Report (F.I.R.-Ext.1) and 
registering, the case, immediately took up the investigation. 
3. In course of investigation, the Investigating Officer (I.O.-
P.W.13) examined the Informant (P.W.1) and recorded his 
statement and those of other witnesses under section 161 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. He visited the spot and 
prepared the spot map (Ext.8). He also seized the sample earth 
and blood stained earth under the seizure list (Ext.3). He then 
having held inquest over the dead body of the deceased, which 
was lying in the District Head Quarters Hospital, Angul, 
prepared his report (Ext.2) and sent the dead body of Jema for 
post mortem examination by issuing necessary requisition. The 
accused thereafter being arrested, gave his statement as regards 
the keeping of the tangia (axe) in a place known to him and his 
statement was so recorded by the I.O. (P.W.13) and marked as 
Ext.10. The accused thereafter led the I.O. (P.W.13) and others 
near the straw heap behind his house and gave recovery of that 
tangia (axe) from inside the straw heap, which was seized under 
seizure list (Ext.11). The I.O. (P.W.13), then sent the incriminating 
article for chemical examination through Court and on

{{ 4 }} 
 
Page 4 of 12 
JCRLA No.38 of 2019 
 
completion of the investigation, he submitted the Final Form 
placing the accused to face the Trial for commission of the offence 
under section 302 of the IPC. 
4. Learned S.D.J.M., Angul, on receipt of the Final Form, took 
cognizance of said offence and after observing the formalities, 
committed the case to the Court of Sessions. That is how the Trial 
commenced by framing the charge for the aforesaid offence 
against the accused. 
5. The prosecution, in support of its case, has examined in 
total eighteen (13) witnesses during trial. As already stated, 
P.W.1, who is the son of the deceased is the Informant and his 
wife is P.W.2 whereas P.W.3 is his elder brother. The younger 
brother of the deceased, i.e., the maternal uncle of P.W.1 has been 
examined as P.W.4 and his son has come to the witness box as 
P.W.5. P.W.6 is the son-in-law of the deceased whereas P.W.7 is 
another brother of the Informant (P.W.1). The scribe of the F.I.R. 
(Ext.1) is P.W.8 and the witness to the statement of the accused 
before the police while in police custody has been examined as 
P.W.9. The Doctor, who had conducted the post mortem 
examination over the dead body of the deceased has been 
examined as P.W.10. The I.O. has come to the witness box at the 
end as P.W.13.

{{ 5 }} 
 
Page 5 of 12 
JCRLA No.38 of 2019 
 
 Besides leading the evidence by examining the above 
witnesses, the prosecution has also proved several documents 
which have been admitted in evidence and marked Exts.1 to 14. 
Out of those, important are the FIR (Ext.1); inquest report (Ext.2); 
post mortem report (Ext.4); and the statement of the accused 
(Ext.10) as also the Chemical Examiner9s report (Ext.14).  
6. The plea of the accused is that of complete denial. No 
evidence has, however, been tendered from the side of the 
accused in support of his evidence.  
7. The Trial Court, upon examination of the evidence of the 
Doctor (P.W.10), who had conducted the autopsy over the dead 
body of the deceased and his report (Ext.4) as well as the the 
evidence of the I.O. (P.W.13), who held the inquest over the dead 
body of the deceased and prepared the report, which has been 
proved as Ext.2 and those of other witnesses, has arrived at a 
conclusion that the deceased has met a homicidal death. In fact, 
said aspect of the case was not under challenge before the Trial 
Court and that is also the position before us in this Appeal.  
 The Doctor (P.W.10), during post mortem examination, has 
sated to have found three numbers of lenear cut injuries on the 
back side of the chest of the deceased. He had also noticed 
lacerated injury of size 1 ½ X 1 cm brain deep on scalp occipital 
area, cutting occipital bone into brain with hematoma of size 199 X

{{ 6 }} 
 
Page 6 of 12 
JCRLA No.38 of 2019 
 
199 over the scalp. On dissection, P.W.10 had noticed the injury to 
brain near occipital area. As per his evidence, all such injuries are 
ante mortem in nature and the cause of death was on account of 
the haemorrhage and shock due to injury to the brain. It is his 
further evidence that such injuries are possible by means of that 
tangia (axe), which he had the occasion to examine. All these 
have been noted by the Doctor (P.W.10) in his report Ext.4.  
 The Informant (P.W/.1) has also stated to have seen her 
mother lying dead with injuries on head, back and neck. That has 
also been the evidence of P.Ws.1, 3, 4 & 6. The I.O. (P.W.13) has 
also so noted during his inquest. With such voluminous evidence 
on record, which have remained unquestioned, we find 
absolutely no difficulty in agreeing with the finding of the Trial 
Court that Jema (deceased) met a homicidal death.  
8. Mr.S. Rout, learned Amicus Curie for the Appellant 
(accused) submitted that the Trial Court, without proper analysis 
of evidence and their appreciation, has returned the finding that 
it is the accused, who is the author of the crime and has 
intentionally caused the death of Jema (deceased) by dealing 
blows on her head, neck and other parts of the body. He further 
submitted that the evidence of the so-called eye witnesses 
(P.Ws.1, 2 & 3) have not been scrutinized by the Trial Court from 
every possible angle in the backdrop of the circumstances

{{ 7 }} 
 
Page 7 of 12 
JCRLA No.38 of 2019 
 
emanating from the evidence available on record. He also 
submitted that when scrutiny of the evidence, in view of the 
relationship of the deceased and other witnesses, was required to 
be made on a higher degree, the Court has not even adopted the 
minimum standard in scrutinizing the evidence of said witnesses. 
He has invited our attention to the depositions of other three 
witnesses, which would be discussed later. He further submitted 
that no support ought to have been derived by the Trial court 
from the evidence as to the detection of human blood of Group-A 
on the said seized tangia (axe) when the recovery of that tangia 
(axe) at the instance of the accused pursuant to his statement by 
leading the police and other witnesses to the place where it was 
kept, i.e., in the straw heap has not been proved and, therefore, 
merely the matching of the blood group is practically of no 
significance.    
9. Mr.S.K. Nayak, learned Additional Government Advocate 
for the Respondent-State, submitted that scrutinizing the 
evidence of P.Ws.1, 2 & 3 from every possible angle, it is not 
possible for a moment to term those as unreliable witnesses and 
their version as untrustworthy, which is also not permissible in 
case of the evidence of the witnesses, who have stated about the 
recovery of tangia (axe) at the instance of the accused. Therefore, 
according to him that tangia (axe) recovered at the instance of the

{{ 8 }} 
 
Page 8 of 12 
JCRLA No.38 of 2019 
 
accused from the place, which was only known to him and not 
accessible to any other and that has also been connected with the 
crime as the blood group of the deceased is matching with the 
group of the human blood detected on the tangia (axe), the Trial 
Court did not commit no mistake in convicting the accused.  
10.  Keeping in view the submissions made, we have carefully 
gone through the impugned judgment of conviction. We have 
also travelled through the depositions of the witnesses examined 
from the side of the prosecution (P.Ws.1 to 13) and have perused 
the documents admitted in evidence marked as Exts.1 to 14.  
11.  In order to address the rival submission, in testing the 
sustainability of the finding of guilt of the accused, as has been 
returned by the Trial Court, we are now called upon to undertake 
to exercise of scrutinizing the evidence of the prosecution 
witnesses, more importantly P.Ws.1, 2 & 3. 
  It has been stated by P.W.1 that at the relevant time, he was 
just at a little distance from the spot and his mother was standing 
near the door. He has further stated that at that point of time, the 
accused arrived on their threshing floor holding a tangia (axe) 
and gave blows on the head, back and neck of his mother. 
Hearing about the incident, when he proceeded to the spot, 
accused ran away holding the tangia (axe). He has also stated that 
it was then early morning around 6.30 a.m. It has also been his

{{ 9 }} 
 
Page 9 of 12 
JCRLA No.38 of 2019 
 
evidence that on the previous day, the accused quarreled with his 
mother as their cow had trespassed into the bari of the accused. 
During cross-examination, it has been specifically elicited that 
accused had dealt four blows on his mother. This witness being 
asked to say the detail specification of that tangia (axe), has so 
stated. When he has been asked during the cross-examination 
asked as to who-else had seen the incident of assault by the 
accused on his mother, he has gone to state that besides himself, 
that means reasserting his presence, he has told that his wife, 
sisters and some other villagers had seen the murderous assault 
on his mother. He, however, then having not been able to name 
the villagers; that in our view is not of that significance at all to 
doubt the evidence of the witnesses. The FIR version remains the 
same in respect of material parts, which this P.W.1 has deposed.  
 The evidence of P.W.2, who is the wife of P.W.1 is also in 
the same vein. She has deposed that there was a quarrel between 
the accused and the deceased and on the next morning around 
6.30 a.m., when she, her mother-in-law (deceased) and her elder 
sister-in-law (P.W.3) were standing at the spot, the accused 
arrived there holding the tangia (axe) and all of a sudden, gave 
four blows on her mother-in-law (deceased), which fell on her 
head, back and neck. She has also provided corroboration to the 
evidence of P.W.1 in stating that P.W.1 then was at a little

{{ 10 }} 
 
Page 10 of 12 
JCRLA No.38 of 2019 
 
distance and when immediately rushed to the spot, the accused 
ran away carrying that tangia (axe).  
 Giving a careful reading to the cross-examination portion of 
the deposition, we find absolutely no such material to have been 
elicited from her to doubt her version. When suggestion has been 
thrown that she had not stated about the details of the blows 
given upon the deceased in her previous statement that has also 
not been proved through the I.O. (P.W.13) and thus its not 
worthy consideration at all. Having thrown with the suggestion 
that she had not seen the assault and was depositing falsehood, 
she had denied the same stoutly.  
 P.W.3 is the elder sister of P.W.1 and she has also stated 
that when she, with P.W.2 and their mother were standing near 
their house, she was at a distance of 30 feet from them. Her 
evidence is that the accused arrived and dealt blows on her 
mother by means of that tangia (axe). She further states that 
immediately P.W.1 arrived at the spot and thereafter 
arrangement was made for her mother being shifted to Hospital 
and that she too had accompanied. This witness has been 
suggested that he had not stated before the police as to the 
distance at which she was standing at that time from the place 
where the assault upon her mother took place that again we find 
to have not been proved through the I.O. (P.W.13), which does 
not merit any consideration. Through cross-examination, no such

{{ 11 }} 
 
Page 11 of 12 
JCRLA No.38 of 2019 
 
circumstances have come to discredit the version of P.W.3 in any 
manner. We thus find that the evidence of these three witnesses 
which are directly related to the deceased are quite consistent 
with one another in so far as the happenings of the incident is 
concerned as also the role played by the accused in dealing the 
blows upon the deceased by that tangia (axe). The evidence also 
receives the corroboration from the Doctor (P.W.10), who having 
examined the tangia (axe), which was seized in course of 
investigation has clearly stated that with such tangia (axe), the 
injuries noticed upon the deceased during post mortem 
examination were possible. We find the evidence of P.Ws.1, 2 & 3 
to be wholly trustworthy and merely because they are related to 
the deceased, that is no ground to suspect their version when 
otherwise their version appear to be credible and reliable. 
12. With the above ocular testimony of P.Ws.1, 2 & 3, we too 
find the evidence of the I.O. (P.W.13), who has recorded the 
statement of the accused while in police custody (Ext.10). It is his 
evidence that the accused led him and others near the straw heap 
on the back side of his house and therefrom he gave recovered of 
that tangia (axe), which was seized under seizure list (Ext.11). 
Although the witness to such recovery (P.W.9) has turned hostile, 
yet we find no reason to disbelieve the evidence of P.W.13 when 
the same is supported by the proof of contemporaneous

{{ 12 }} 
 
Page 12 of 12 
JCRLA No.38 of 2019 
 
document in connection with the same. In addition to the above, 
we too find that the prosecution has proved the nexus between 
the tangia (axe) and the crime as the tangia (axe) was found to 
contain human blood of Group-A which is the blood group of the 
deceased and that is not at all explained by the accused. 
13. On a conspectus of analysis of the evidence hereinabove, 
this Court finds that the prosecution has proved its case against 
the accused as having committed the murder of Jema beyond 
reasonable doubt  
14. In the result, the Appeal stands dismissed. The judgment of 
conviction and the order of sentence dated 22 nd January, 2019 
passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Angul, in C.T. (s) No.181 of 
2016 are hereby confirmed.   
            (D. Dash), 
   Judge. 
       Dr.S.K. Panigrahi, J. I Agree. 
          (Dr.S.K. Panigrahi), 
             Judge.  
 
       
      
 
 
  
Basu