ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK 
 
AFR          W.P(C) NO. 13667 OF 2023  
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 
227 of the Constitution of India. 
---------------   
 
  Aparna Sahoo                 ..…                          Petitioner 
        
-Versus- 
 
State of Odisha & Ors.       …..                     Opp. Parties      
 
 
For petitioner     : M/s. S.K. Dash, P.Dash, A.K. 
Biswal and P. Harichandan, 
Advocates 
     
For opp. parties  :  Mr. P.P. Mohanty,  
Addl. Govt. Advocate 
 [O.Ps.1 to 3 & 5] 
 
 M/s. R.N. Behera, L.K. Padhi 
and S. Dora, Advocates 
 [O.P.4] 
    
P R E S E N T: 
    
   THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE B.R.SARANGI 
AND 
THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MURAHARI SRI RAMAN 
 
 Date of Hearing : 31.07.2023 :: Date of Judgment: 03.08.2023  
 
DR. B.R. SARANGI,J.   The petitioner, by means of this writ 
petition, seeks to quash the decision taken by the

// 2 // 
 
 
opposite parties no.2, 3 & 5 vide Annexure-2 dated 
11.04.2023 and Annexure-4 series dated 13.04.2023 
and 11.04.2023 in allowing the technical bid of opposite 
party no.4 and declaring him as the successful bidd er 
in respect of appointment of handling and transport  
contractor (transport agent) under Mid-Day Meal 
programme of Balasore district for the year 2023-24 , in 
pursuance of the tender call notice dated 15.03.2023. 
 2.  The factual matrix of the case, in brief, is 
that opposite party no.2-Collector & District Magis trate, 
Balasore-cum-Chairman (MDM), Balasore vide 
Annexure-1 invited a tender call notice on 15.03.20 23 
for appointment of transport agent under Mid-Day Me al 
programme in respect of Balasore district for the y ear 
2023-24 from the eligible contractors. As per the s aid 
tender call notice, the tender was to be submitted 
through registered post and the last date for 
submission of tender was 10.04.2023 at 4.00 PM. The  
date and time of opening of tender papers was 
11.04.2023 at 11.00 AM. Clause-2 of the tender call  
notice contained the general instructions and guidelines

// 3 // 
 
 
for the tenderer. Under Clause-2.3 thereof, it was 
stipulated that ‘in case the cost of tender paper, EMD 
and any other document as per Annexure-II is not 
enclosed with the technical bid, the tender paper s hall 
be rejected’.  
 2.1  Pursuant to the tender call notice dated 
15.03.2023, the petitioner, being an experienced 
transport and handling contractor having valid lice nse, 
submitted her bid on 06.04.2023 enclosing all the 
relevant documents. The tender was opened on 
11.04.2023 by the tender committee and the said 
committee prepared a comparative statement in 
presence of the representatives of the tenderers an d/or 
tenderers. In the said check list/comparative statement, 
the tender committee as against opposite party no.4  
recorded, in respect of the documents required unde r 
column nos.6, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15, that “N ot 
submitted in Technical Bid but submitted in Main 
envelope”. Even though opposite party no.4, along w ith 
the technical bid, had not submitted the documents 
required under the columns noted above, his technic al

// 4 // 
 
 
bid was allowed by the tender committee contravenin g 
the conditions stipulated in the tender call notice.  
2.2  The authorized representative of the 
petitioner immediately submitted an objection on 
11.04.2023, which was received on 12.04.2023 by the  
District Education Officer, Balasore, whom the tend er 
was submitted. But, without considering the objecti on, 
the tender committee opened the price bid on 
13.04.2023 in absence of two members of the tender 
committee, namely, DSWO, Balasore and R.T.O, 
Balasore. On the said date, the tender committee drawn 
a proceeding and declared opposite party no.4 as L- 1 
and selected him as H & T Contractor (MDM) for the 
year 2023-24 (up to 30.04.2024). Hence, this writ 
petition. 
 3.  Mr. S.K. Dash, learned counsel appearing for 
the petitioner vehemently contended that the select ion 
of opposite party no.4 as successful bidder is in g ross 
violation of the conditions stipulated in the tende r call 
notice. Thereby, his selection is arbitrary, unreaso nable

// 5 // 
 
 
and contrary to the provisions of law. Apart from t he 
same, there was gross defect in the decision making  
process of selecting opposite party no.4 as success ful 
bidder. Nevertheless, the objection raised by the 
petitioner with regard to disqualification incurred  by 
opposite party no.4 was not considered. Therefore, t he 
decision making process adopted by the opposite 
parties cannot be sustained in the eye of law and 
consequentially, the same should be quashed. 
 4.  Mr. P.P. Mohanty, learned Addl. Government 
Advocate appearing for the State-opposite parties 
contended that on the date of opening of the tender , as 
per guidelines, the EMD, technical bid and price bi d 
should be kept in the main envelope and at the time  of 
opening of the envelops, it was found that all enve lopes 
were found in order, but some papers of technical b id 
(check list of Annexure-II) of opposite party no.4 were 
not kept in the technical bid envelop, but those 
documents were kept in the main envelop. It is furt her 
contended that opposite party no.4 had quoted the 
lowest amount of Rs.127/- per quintal, whereas the

// 6 // 
 
 
petitioner had quoted Rs.148.70 per quintal and 
another bidder, namely, Sri Surenjan Barik had quot ed 
Rs.149.09 per quintal. Therefore, opposite party no. 4 
was selected and appointed as transport contractor.  
Thereby, no illegality or irregularity has been committed 
by the tender committee in selecting opposite party no.4 
as successful bidder. 
 5.  Mr. R.N. Behera, learned counsel appearing 
for opposite party no.4 vehemently contended that 
pursuant to bid invitation notice of re-tender for 
transportation of MDM food grain in Balasore distri ct 
issued on 15.03.2023, opposite party no.4, being 
eligible, submitted his technical and financial bid  along 
with tender papers, cost of Rs.20,000/- (non-
refundable) within time to the office of the Distri ct 
Education Officer, Balasore. The tender paper was 
opened on the given date and time in the bid invita tion 
notice (Annexure-I), where opposite party no.4 came out 
successful and other two tenderers became 
unsuccessful. Therefore, the work was allotted in favour 
of opposite party no.4. It is further contended tha t

// 7 // 
 
 
opposite party no.4 submitted all the relevant 
documents, as stipulated under Claue-7 (tenderer 
process) of the tender call notice, i.e., Annexure- 1 
(Technical Bid), Annexure-II (Check list), Annexure -III 
(Declaration), Annexure-IV (price bid) and Annexure -V. 
On consideration of the same, opposite party no.4 w as 
declared successful bidder. Therefore, the writ pet ition 
at the instance of the petitioner should be quashed. 
 6.  This Court heard Mr. S.K. Dash, learned 
counsel appearing for the petitioner; Mr. P.P. Moha nty, 
learned Addl. Government Advocate appearing for the  
State-opposite parties and Mr. R.N. Behera, learned  
counsel appearing for opposite party no.4 in hybrid  
mode. Pleadings have been exchanged between the 
parties and with the consent of learned counsel for  the 
parties, the writ petition is being disposed of fin ally at 
the stage of admission. 
 7.  Before delving into the issue involved in this  
case, the relevant provisions contained in the bid 
invitation notice of re-tender for transportation o f MDM

// 8 // 
 
 
food grain in Balasore district under Annexure-1 da ted 
15.03.2023 are quoted below:- 
“2. General Instruction and Guidelines for 
the Tenderer:- 
2.3. In case the cost of Tender Paper, EMD and 
any document as per ANNEXURE-II is not 
enclosed with the Technical Bid, the Tender 
Paper shall be rejected. 
2.4. The District Tender Committee reserves the 
right to negotiate with the Tenderer for a 
workable rate. 
xxx  xxx  xxx 
   7. Tenderer Process:- 
7.1 Tenderer participating in the tender process 
shall submit a technical bid & price bid in 
response to the Tender call notice. 
7.2  Earnest Money Deposit (EMD), Technical 
Bid and Price Bid  shall be contained in 
separate sealed envelopes clearly marked 
“EMD”, “Technical Bid” & “Price Bid” as per 
norms specified below. 
7.2.1 First  sealed envelope will contain only the 
EMD. This envelope shall be marked “PART-I-
EMD”.  
7.2.2. Second  sealed envelope will contain the 
Technical Bid (Annexure-1), check list 
(Annexure-II) & Declaration (Annexure- III ) & 
solvency certificate. This envelope shall be 
marked: “PART-II-TECHNICAL BID” . 
7.2.3 Third  sealed envelope will contain the 
Price Bid (Annexure-IV), of this envelope 
shall be marked PART-III-PRICE BID . 
7.2.4.  FOURTH  sealed envelope will contain all 
the THREE envelopes sealed separately i.e. 
EMD, TECHNICAL BID & PRICE BID with 
superscription “TENDER FOR APPOINTMENT

// 9 // 
 
 
OF TRANSPORTING AGENT UNDER M.D.M 
PROGRAMME IN BALASORE DISTRICT.” 
xxx  xxx  xxx 
  8.4. Information about Tenderers. The Tenderers 
must furnish full, precise, correct and accurate 
details of information asked for in the Tender 
documents. Technical Bid & Price Bid. 
xxx  xxx  xxx 
30. Instruction to fill up the Technical Bid:- 
“30.1 The Tenderer shall go through the Tender 
Documents thoroughly before filing the Technical 
Bid (Annexure-I)  and submitting the same at 
Office of the DEO Balasore. 
30.2. The number of pages in the Tender Paper 
and Tender Document to be checked to ascertain 
that all the pages are intact. 
30.3 The Technical Bid has to be filled neatly 
and there shall be no overwriting. 
30.4 All the columns of the Technical Bid have to 
be filled Column which is not required  to be 
filled by a Tendered, a cross mark (X) has to be 
given against that Column. 
30.5 The Tenderer shall affix a self attested pass 
port size photograph on the Technical Bid at the 
specified space. 
30.6 The Tenderer shall enclose the cost of 
Tender Paper. 
30.7 The tenderer shall enclose the cost of EMD 
of requisite amount. 
30.8 All the documents as per the Check List 
(Annexure-II)  have to be .  
30.9 Conditional Bid shall not be accepted. 
30.10 In case any Forged Documents noticed 
during verification of documents or period of 
Agreement, the EMD & Security Deposit as the 
case may be shall be forfeited.

// 10 // 
 
 
30.11 The Tenderer shall submit an declaration 
stating the fact that he has agreed to the 
conditions, terms and other details of the Tender 
Paper and Documents (Annexure-III) . 
30.12 The Tender Paper, Tender Document, 
Technical Bid and copy of the documents 
(Annexure-II)  & declaration (Annexure-III)  have 
to be signed by the Tenderer. 
30.13 Documents to be enclosed as per 
Annexure have to be attested by the Notary 
Public. 
30.14 All the pages of the Tender paper 
should be duly signed by the Tenderer.” 
Annexure-II states about Check List which 
categorically speaks about the document to be 
attached with the technical bid. 
  
8.  If aforementioned provisions of the bid 
invitation notice are carefully perused, it would b e seen 
that Clause-2.3 clearly provides that in case the c ost of 
tender paper, EMD and any document as per Annexure-
II is not enclosed with the technical bid, the tend er 
paper shall be rejected. Clause-7 deals with Tender er 
Process. Under Clause-7.2.2 it is clarified that se cond 
sealed envelope will contain the Technical Bid 
(Annexure-1), check list (Annexure-II) & Declaratio n 
(Annexure-III) & solvency certificate. The said env elope 
shall be marked “PART-II-TECHNICAL BID”. Clause-
7.2.3 envisages that Third Sealed Envelope will cont ain

// 11 // 
 
 
price bid and Clause-7.2.4 states that Fourth Seale d 
Envelope will contain all the three envelopes seale d 
separately, i.e., EMD, technical bid and price bid with 
superscription “TENDER FOR APPOINTMENT OF 
TRANSPORTING AGENT UNDER M.D.M. PROGRAMME 
IN BALASORE DISTRICT”. Clause-7.3 provides that 
envelope containing technical bid will be opened fi rst 
and Clause-7.4 states that price bid of the tendere r, 
who qualifies in the technical bid shall be opened and 
considered. In Clause-8.4, it has been stated that the 
tenderer must furnish full, precise, correct and 
accurate details of information asked for in the te nder 
documents, technical bid and price bid. Similarly, 
Clause-30 deals with the instruction to fill up the  
technical bid. Annexure-1 of the tender documents 
relates to technical bid, which specifies filing of different 
documents. Annexure-II of the tender documents 
relates to check list, which speaks about the documents 
to be attached with the technical bid. Therefore, th ese 
are the requirements to be fulfilled by the tendere rs 
pursuant to bid invitation notice.

// 12 // 
 
 
 9.  Pursuant to such notice inviting tender, the 
petitioner, opposite party no.4 and one Surenjan Ba rik 
submitted their bids within the specified date and time 
and their tender papers were also opened on the dat e 
and time fixed by the tender committee, i.e., 
11.04.2023. The tender committee also prepared a 
check list/comparative statement in presence of the  
representatives of the tenderers. In the said check  
list/comparative statement, the tender committee 
stated as against opposite party no.4, in respect o f the 
documents required under column nos.6, 7, 10, 11, 1 2, 
13, 14 and 15, that “Not submitted in Technical Bid but 
submitted in Main envelope”. Since the documents fi led 
in the main envelope were taken into consideration,  
opposite party no.4 was selected as successful bidder.  
 10.  Therefore, the question arises if the tender 
conditions stipulate in Clauses-7.2.1, 7.2.2 and 7. 2.3 a 
specific mode of submission of documents, whether a ny 
deviation thereof can be legally permissible and if  any 
relaxation has been made by the tender committee fo r 
determination of the bid in favour of opposite part y

// 13 // 
 
 
no.4, in that case whether the tender committee has  
acted in consonance with the tender conditions or not. 
 11.  As per Clause-7.2.1 of the tender documents, 
first sealed envelope will contain only the EMD and  the 
said envelope shall be marked “PART-I-EMD”. Clause-
7.2.2 states that second sealed envelope will contain the 
Technical Bid (Annexure-1), Check List (Annexure-II ) & 
Declaration (Annexure-III) & solvency certificate. The 
said envelope shall be marked as “PART-II-TECHNICAL  
BID”. Similarly, Clause-7.2.3 indicates that “Third  
sealed envelope will contain the Price Bid (Annexure-
IV), of this envelope shall be marked PART-III-PRICE 
BID . Clause-7.2.4 indicates that fourth sealed envelop e 
will contain all the three envelopes sealed separately i.e. 
EMD, technical bid & price bid with superscription 
“TENDER FOR APPOINTMENT OF TRANSPORTING 
AGENT UNDER M.D.M. PROGRAMME IN BALASORE 
DISTRICT ”. Therefore, each envelope contains relevant 
documents for each category. If any of the tender 
conditions is not satisfied, then, as per Clause-2. 3 of 
the bid inviting notice, the tender paper shall be

// 14 // 
 
 
rejected. As such, there is no relaxation clause available 
in the bid documents. Therefore, a tenderer should 
adhere to Clauses-7.2.1 to 7.2.4 scrupulously. Clau se-
30 of the bid invitation notice states about instru ction 
to fill up the technical bid. As per Clause-30.1, t he 
tenderer shall go through the tender documents 
thoroughly before filling the technical bid (Annexu re-1) 
and submitting the same at Office of the DEO Balaso re. 
Similarly, Clause-30.8 states that all the document s, as 
per the check list (Annexure-II), have to be submit ted. 
Since a mode has been prescribed how to submit bid 
and if it is not adhered to, there is defect in sub mission 
of technical bid. 
 12.  In Shiv Sagar Tiwari v. Union of India 
and Ors.,  AIR 1997 SC 1483. The apex Court held that 
whatever procedure the Government proposes to follo w 
in accordance with the tender must be clearly state d in 
the tender notice. The consideration of the tender 
received and procedure followed in the matter of 
acceptance of tender should be transparent, fair an d 
open.

// 15 // 
 
 
   Similar view has also been taken in Common 
Cause v. Union of India , 1996 (6) SCC 593. 
 13.   After opening of the technical bid, a 
comparative statement was prepared. The tender 
committee also recorded, so far as columns no.6, 7,  10, 
11, 12, 13, 14 & 15 are concerned “not submitted in  
technical bid but submitted in the main envelope” 
which is apparent from the document annexed as 
Annexure-2 to the writ petition. Thereby, opposite party 
no.4 has violated the condition stipulated under 
Clause-7.2.2 of the bid invitation notice. As a 
consequence thereof, he, having not adhered to the 
tender conditions, has incurred disqualification and any 
relaxation given by the tender committee is in gros s 
violation of the said clause.  
14.  It may be contended that it is too technical t o 
take such a plea. But Clauses-7.2.1 to 7.2.4 of the  bid 
invitation notice prescribe the specific mode that cannot 
be ignored on mere understanding of technical defec t. 
There is some meaning attached to each of the clause to

// 16 // 
 
 
be adhered to for the purpose of consideration of 
selection of tenderer. If in violation thereof the tender 
committee selects, the decision has to be considere d 
illegal, arbitrary and contrary to the provisions o f law. 
This fact has been admitted in paragraph-6 of the 
counter affidavit filed by opposite party no.3, whi ch is 
quoted below:- 
“6. ……. It is humbly submitted that on the date of 
opening of the tender, as per guidelines, the EMD, 
technical bid and the price bid should be kept in t he 
main envelope and at the time of opening of the 
envelopes, it was found that all envelopes were fou nd 
in order, but some papers of technical bid (Check l ist 
of Annexure-II) of the Opp. Party No.4 were not kept in 
the Technical Bid envelop, but those documents were  
kept in the main envelope.” 
 From the above, it can be safely inferred that wha t has 
been stated by the tender committee in their 
comparative statement in respect of the technical b id, 
the same has been duly acknowledged in the counter 
affidavit filed by opposite party no.3. As such, op posite 
party no.4 has taken a contrary stand in paragraph-6 of 
his counter affidavit. But the comparative statemen t of 
technical bid under Annexure-2, to which the 
representative of opposite party no.4 is also a sig natory,

// 17 // 
 
 
clearly states what the technical committee has not ed. 
Thereby, opposite party no.4, having acknowledged th e 
defect in his own tender document, cannot take a 
different stand than that has been recorded in the 
document placed on record as Annexure-2. Once 
opposite party no.4 has acknowledged the recording of 
the tender committee made in Annexure-2 by putting 
his signature therein, which has been duly endorsed  in 
the counter affidavit filed by opposite party no.3,  viz., 
the tendering authority, who is also a party to the  
tender committee, any action taken or any stand tak en 
by opposite party no.4 bereft of any document avail able 
cannot be sustained in the eye of law. 
 15.  It may be noted that in exercise of power of 
judicial review in respect of contracts entered int o on 
behalf of the State or instrumentality of the State , such 
as Corporation, the Court prima facie concerns whet her 
there has been any infirmity in the decision making  
process. In that case, the Court can examine whethe r 
the decision making process was reasonable, rationa le

// 18 // 
 
 
not arbitrary and not violative of Article-14 of th e 
Constitution of India. 
16. 
 In Sterling Computers Ltd. v. M & N 
Publications Ltd.  (1993) 1 SCC 445, the apex Court 
observed as under:- 
“18. While exercising the power of judicial 
review, in respect of contracts entered into on 
behalf of the State, the court is concerned 
primarily as to whether there has been any 
infirmity in the ‘decision-making process’. … the 
courts can certainly examine whether ‘decision-
making process’ was reasonable, rational, not 
arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the 
Constitution.” 
 
17.   In Tata Cellular v. Union of India, (1994) 6 
SCC 651 : AIR 1996 SC 11, the apex Court, referring  to 
the limitations relating to the scope of judicial r eview of 
administrative decisions and exercise of powers in 
awarding contracts, held to the following effect:- 
 “(1) The modern trend points to judicial restraint  
in administrative action. 
 
(2) The court does not sit as a court of appeal but  
merely reviews the manner in which the decision 
was made. 
 
(3) The court does not have the expertise to 
correct the administrative action. If a review of 
the administrative decision is permitted it will be  
substituting its own decision, without the 
necessary expertise which itself may be fallible.

// 19 // 
 
 
 
(4) The terms of the invitation to tender cannot be  
open to judicial scrutiny because the invitation to  
tender is in the realm of contract. … More often 
than not, such decisions are made qualitatively 
by experts. 
 
(5) The Government must have freedom of 
contract. In other words, a fair play in the joints  
is a necessary concomitant for an administrative 
body functioning in an administrative sphere or 
quasi-administrative sphere. However, the 
decision must not only be tested by the 
application of Wednesbury principle of 
reasonableness (including its other facts pointed 
out above) but must be free from arbitrariness not 
affected by bias or actuated by mala fides. 
 
(6) Quashing decisions may impose heavy 
administrative burden on the administration and 
lead to increased and unbudgeted expenditure.” 
 
The apex Court also noted that there are inherent 
limitations in the exercise of power of judicial re view in 
contractual matter. As such, it was observed that t he 
duty to act fairly will vary in extent, depending upon the 
nature of cases, to which the said principle is sou ght to 
be applied. It was further held that the State has the 
right to refuse the lowest or any other tender, pro vided 
it tries to get the best person or the best quotati on, and 
the power to choose is not exercised for any collat eral 
purpose or in infringement of Article 14.

// 20 // 
 
 
18.  In Air India Ltd.  v. Cochin International 
Airport Ltd.  (2000) 2 SCC 617, the apex Court, while 
summarizing the scope of interference as enunciated  in 
several earlier decisions, held as follows:- 
“7. … The award of a contract, whether it is 
by a private party or by a public body or the 
State, is essentially a commercial transaction. In 
arriving at a commercial decision considerations 
which are paramount are commercial 
considerations. The State can choose its own 
method to arrive at a decision. It can fix its own 
terms of invitation to tender and that is not open 
to judicial scrutiny. It can enter into negotiation s 
before finally deciding to accept one of the offers  
made to it. Price need not always be the sole 
criterion for awarding a contract. It is free to 
grant any relaxation, for bona fide reasons, if the 
tender conditions permit such a relaxation. It 
may not accept the offer even though it happens 
to be the highest or the lowest. But the State, its  
corporations, instrumentalities and agencies are 
bound to adhere to the norms, standards and 
procedures laid down by them and cannot 
depart from them arbitrarily. Though that 
decision is not amenable to judicial review, the 
court can examine the decision-making process 
and interfere if it is found vitiated by mala fides , 
unreasonableness and arbitrariness. The State, 
its corporations, instrumentalities and agencies 
have the public duty to be fair to all 
concerned. Even when some defect is found in 
the decision-making process the court must 
exercise its discretionary power under Article 
226 with great caution and should exercise it 
only in furtherance of public interest and not 
merely on the making out of a legal point. The 
court should always keep the larger public 
interest in mind in order to decide whether its 
intervention is called for or not. Only when it 
comes to a conclusion that overwhelming public 
interest requires interference, the court should 
intervene.”

// 21 // 
 
 
19.   The scope of judicial review has also been 
taken into consideration elaborately in Jagdish Mandal 
v. State of Odisha, (2007) 14 SCC 517. In paragraph-
22 of the said judgment, the apex Court held as 
follows:- 
“…………..Therefore, a court before interfering in 
tender or contractual matters in exercise of power 
of judicial review, should pose to itself the 
following questions: 
(i) Whether the process adopted or decision 
made by the authority is mala fide or intended to 
favour someone; 
OR  
Whether the process adopted or decision made 
is so arbitrary and irrational that the court can 
say: “the decision is such that no responsible 
authority acting reasonably and in accordance 
with relevant law could have reached”; 
(ii) Whether public interest is affected. 
If the answers are in the negative, there should 
be no interference under Article 226. Cases 
involving blacklisting or imposition of penal 
consequences on a tenderer/contractor or 
distribution of State largesse (allotment of 
sites/shops, grant of licences, dealerships and 
franchises) stand on a different footing as they 
may require a higher degree of fairness in action.” 
  
  Similar view has also been reiterated in 
Michigan Rubber (India) Limited v. State of 
Karnatak, (2012) 8 SCC 216 and Maa Binda Express 
Carrier v. North East Frontier Railway, (2014) 3 SCC 
760.

// 22 // 
 
 
20.  In Vidarbha Irrigation Development 
Corporation v. M/s Anoj Kumar Agarwalla ), (2020) 17 
SCC 577, the apex Court, in paragraph-16 of the 
judgment, held as under:- 
 “16. It is clear even on a reading of this 
judgment that the words used in the tender 
document cannot be ignored or treated as 
redundant or superfluous they must be given 
meaning and their necessary significance. 
Given the fact that in the present case, an 
essential tender condition which had to be 
strictly complied with was not so complied 
with, the appellant would have no power to 
condone lack of such strict compliance. Any 
such condonation, as has been done in the 
present case, would amount to perversity in 
the understanding or appreciation of the 
terms of the tender conditions, which must be 
interfered with by a constitutional court.” 
 
Since in the instant case opposite party no.4 has n ot 
complied with the conditions, as stipulated in the tender 
notice, and the committee has decided to make a 
verification and confirmation from the concerned 
authorities, instead of doing so, the same could no t 
have been settled in favour of opposite party no.4. 
21.  In Afcons Infrastructure Limited v. Nagpur 
Metro Rail Corporation Limited , (2016) 16 SCC 818,

// 23 // 
 
 
the apex Court held that the constitutional courts are 
concerned with the decision making process.  A decision 
if challenged (the decision having been arrived at 
through a valid process), the constitutional Courts  can 
interfere if the decision is perverse.  However, th e 
constitutional Courts are expected to exercise rest raint 
in interfering with the administrative decision and ought 
not substitute its view for that of the administrat ive 
authority.  
 22.  Considering the facts and law, as discussed 
above, since the selection of opposite party no.4 a s a 
transport agent has been made in gross violation of  the 
tender conditions contained in Annexure-1, this Cou rt, 
in exercise of power under judicial review, as the 
decision making process for selection of opposite p arty 
no.4 is arbitrary, unreasonable and contrary to the  
provisions of law and violates the terms and condit ions 
of the tender, holds that the same cannot be sustai ned 
in the eye of law. Accordingly, the decision of the  tender 
committee taken, vide Annexure-2 dated 11.04.2023 
and Annexure-4 series dated 13.04.2023 and

// 24 // 
 
 
11.04.2023, in selecting opposite party no.4 as 
transport agent, pursuant to bid invitation notice under 
Annexure-1 dated 15.03.2023, is liable to be quashe d 
and is hereby quashed. As a consequence thereof, th is 
Court directs opposite party-authorities to go for a fresh 
tender in conformity with the provisions of law for  
appointment of transport agent under M.D.M. 
programme in respect of Balasore district for the y ear 
2023-24. 
 23.  In the result, the writ petition stands allow ed, 
but, however, under the circumstances of the case there 
shall be no order as to costs. 
 
 
       
(DR. B.R. SARANGI)  
      JUDGE 
 
 
M.S. RAMAN, J.   I agree. 
 
 
                               (M.S. RAMAN) 
                 JUDGE 
 
 
 
Orissa High Court, Cuttack 
The 3rd August, 2023, Alok