Page 1 of 16 
 
 
 IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK 
WPC (OAC) No.1295  of 2018  
 
      
Subrat Kumar Singh  ….         Petitioner  
-versus- 
State of Odisha and Ors.  …. Opposite Parties 
 
 
    Advocates appeared in the case through Hybrid Mode: 
For Petitioner  : Mr. Subhransu Bhusan Mohanty, 
Adv. 
 
For Opposite Parties. :  Mr. H.K. Panigrahi, ASC 
                    
    
 
     CORAM:                         
                        Dr. JUSTICE S.K. PANIGRAHI  
     
 
 
DATE OF HEARING:-05.04.2023 
DATE OF JUDGMENT: -03.07.2023 
 
Dr. S.K. Panigrahi, J. 
1. In this Writ Petition, the Petitioner has made a prayer to quash 
the order dated 19.03.2018 passed by the Opposite Party No.3/ 
Additional District Magistrate, Balasore imposing certain 
penalty on him. He further seeks a direction from this Court to 
the Opposite Parties to regularize his period of suspension with 
admissible pay, increments and consequential benefits.  
I. FACTS OF THE CASE: 
2. The fact of the case is that the Petitioner is now serving as 
Revenue Inspector in the office of Tempo under Jaleswar 
Tahasil. Since his date of appointment, he has been discharging

Page 2 of 16 
 
the duties to the utmost satisfaction of the authority. No adverse 
entry was made against his name. While he was continuing 
under Nilagiri Tahasil, series of transfer orders were passed 
against him within a period of three months. All the transfer 
orders have been issued by the Tahasildar, Nilagiri who is not 
competent and has no authority to pass such transfer orders as 
per Odisha District Revenue Service (Method of Recruitment 
and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1983. As amendment from 
time to time, the Collector is the designated and the transferring, 
appointing and Disciplinary authority. In contravention of such 
Rules, the Tahasildar, Nilagiri has passed four transfer orders 
within a period of three months. One transfer orders have been 
passed on 31.12.2012,  22.01.2015, 02.04.2015 and 06.04.2015. Th e 
series of such transfer orders issued by the Tahasildar, Nilagiri 
has harassed the Petitioner who was constrained to obey it in an 
official indisposition. 
3. The Petitioner being harassed by the series of transfer 
approached the Tahasildar, Nilagiri to release the order of 
transfer. However, the Tahasildar intimated to the Collector, 
Balasore against the Petitioner to take disciplinary action. Then 
the Collector without any preliminary enquiry and without any 
prima facie allegation, placed the Petitioner under suspension 
on 17.04.2014 under Rule-12 of O.C.S. (C.C.A.) Rules, 1962 by

Page 3 of 16 
 
incorporating in the said order alleging negligence in duty, 
misbehavior and misuse of official position. 
4. The Petitioner has filed a petition before the Collector on 
22.4.2015 to revoke the order of suspension. When the 
revocation petition dated 22.04.2015 of the Petitioner was 
pending for consideration, the Collector, Balasore framed 
memorandum of charges and statement of imputation along 
with memo of evidence on 30.05.2015 and vide letter dated 
11.08.2015 asked the Petitioner to file written statement of 
defence within a period of 30 days from the date of receipt of 
memorandum. 
5. Challenging the order of suspension dated 27.04.2015, the 
Petitioner had filed O.A. No.1647 (C) of 2015. The same was 
dismissed on 26.10.2016 with the observations as follows:  
“Hence, in view of the above reasons, the O.A. i s 
dismissed, but the respondents are directed to 
initiate the Departmental Proceeding within one 
month if not already initiated and serve the copy 
of the charge memo to the applicant and complete 
the departmental proceeding as early as possible 
preferably within 6 months. Besides this, as per 
that guide-lines, every month the suspension is to 
be reviewed and the applicant is at liberty to act as 
per Rule-12(5) of OCS (CC&A) Rules.  
Xx xx xx xx”  
 
6. Thereafter, the Additional District Magistrate, Balasore by the 
order of the Collector, Balasore considered the revocation

Page 4 of 16 
 
petition of the Petitioner and vide order dated 30.06.2016 
recalled the order of suspension and reinstated him in service 
and posted him at Jaleswar, Tahasil. After reinstatement of the 
Petitioner, the Sub-Collector, Nilagiri being the Enquiring 
Officer of his proceeding, examined and Cross examined the 
documents and witnesses with reference to the Article of 
Charges. On conclusion, it was found by the Enquiring Officer 
that the Petitioner has not been found guilty of the Charges and 
finally exonerated him by order dated 27.07.2017. In spite of the 
order of exoneration, the Additional District Magistrate being 
authorized by the Collector imposed punishment against the 
Petitioner vide order dated 19.03.2018 which are as follows:-  
(i) One annual increment shall be stopped without 
cumulative effect.  
(ii) The unauthorized period of leave is treated as leave due. 
7. Challenging the order dated 19.03.2018, the Petitioner has filed 
this Writ Petition contending that the order of disciplinary 
authority is palpably wrong and erroneous in view of the fact 
that Enquiry Officer has not suggested any penalty due to want 
of evidence against him in reference to Article of charges which 
could not be established. On careful consideration of evidence, 
statement and fact, the Enquiry Officer did not find any fault 
with the Petitioner except the warning that he should not be

Page 5 of 16 
 
careless and ultimately submitted the report in favour of the 
Petitioner by exonerating him from all charges. 
II. SUBMISSIONS ADVANCED ON BEHALF OF THE 
PETITIONER: 
8. Learned counsel for the Petitioner submitted that the Petitioner 
being harassed by the series of transfer objected before the 
Tahasildar for such administrative autocracy. However, ill 
feelings grew among them and the Tahasildar persuaded the 
Collector to take administrative action against him for other 
means and grounds. However, without prima facie getting 
satisfied about the conduct of the Petitioner, the Collector placed 
him under suspension on 17.04.2015 by fixing the Head Quarter 
at Sadar Tahasil, Balasore. 
9. It was submitted that Collector has not specifically mentioned 
the type and extent of negligence in duty, misbehavior and 
misuse of official position. The Rule-12 of the C.C.A. Rules 
prescribes the procedure to place an employee under 
suspension. It is further mentioned in the said Rules that before 
placing an employee under suspension, the Disciplinary 
Authority is required to hold the preliminary enquiry regarding 
prima facie nature of allegation. The procedural lapses done by 
the Collector has made the suspension order revocable.  
10.  In this connection, the Petitioner has filed a petition before the 
Collector on 22.4.2015 seeking revocation of the order of

Page 6 of 16 
 
suspension. When the revocation petition dated 22.04.2015 of 
the Petitioner was pending consideration, the Collector, Balasore 
framed memorandum of charges and statement of imputation 
along with memo of evidence on 30.05.2015 and vide letter 
dated 11.08.2015 asked the Petitioner to file written statement of 
defence within a period of 30 days from the date of receipt of 
memorandum. 
11.  However, the Additional District Magistrate, Balasore by the 
order of the Collector, Balasore considered the revocation 
petition of the Petitioner and vide order dated 30.06.2016 
recalled the order of suspension and reinstated him in service 
and posted him at Jaleswar, Tahasil. After reinstatement of the 
Petitioner, the Sub-Collector, Nilagiri being the Enquiring 
Officer of his proceeding, examined and cross examined the 
documents and witnesses in reference to the Article of Charges. 
On conclusion, the Petitioner was not found guilty by the 
Enquiring Officer of the Charges and finally exonerated him by 
order dated 27.07.2017. In spite of the order of exoneration, the 
Additional District Magistrate being authorized by the Collector 
imposed punishment against the Petitioner vide order dated 
19.03.2018 imposing penalty as stated supra.  
12.  Once the report of Enquiry Officer is silent and does not cast 
any stigma against his character, the disciplinary authority 
without application of mind has imposed punishment which is

Page 7 of 16 
 
too harsh and arbitrary only to put the Petitioner in a blemish 
record. The Disciplinary Authority without calling for 
explanation from the delinquent, only on the basis of report of 
Enquiry Officer, which is a statutory requirement, and not 
considering the materials on record, imposed punishment 
unilaterally on the Petitioner which is not permissible under the 
CCA Rules. Hence, the order of the Disciplinary Authority is 
liable to be quashed. Moreover, before imposition of 
punishment, the Petitioner has not been informed in writing 
about proposed action to be taken against him in awarding 
some punishment and no opportunity of hearing has been given 
to the Petitioner which is mandatory under Rule-16 of OCS 
(CCA) Rules. All the instructions of the Government flown 
under Article 311(2) have not been followed. So, due to 
procedural lapses and infirmity, the order dated 19.03.2018 of 
disciplinary authority is unsuitable in law. Hence, the same is 
liable to be quashed.  
III. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE OPP. PARTIES 2 & 4/ 
STATE: 
13. On the other hand, learned counsel for the Opposite Party Nos.2 
and 4/ State submitted that the Petitioner was serving as 
Revenue Inspector of Santaragadia under Nilgiri Tahasil. While 
he was serving as such placed under suspension vide order No.

Page 8 of 16 
 
12/Estt. dated 17.04.2015 for his negligence in duties, 
disobedience of order, misbehavior and misuse of official 
position. 
14.  It was further submitted that that an allegation was made 
against the Petitioner which was enquired into. It was found 
that the Petitioner had misused his position by initiating 
encroachment case against the person in possession of a patch of 
land for which he was transferred to RI office Kans vide order 
No.14 dated 31.12.2014. The Petitioner had not responded to the 
instructions and did not join. Subsequently, on rearrangement, 
he was transferred and posted to said R.I. circle vide order 
No.29 dated 02.04.2015. The petitioner was instructed to hand 
over charges vide letter No.1607 dated 06.04.2013, but he did not 
pay any heed to it. Rather, he misbehaved the authority i.e. Ex-
Tahasildar, Nilgiri (O.P. No.5). Apart from this, during his 
incumbency as R.I., Santaragadia, he had neglected his duties 
towards disposal of Mutation Cases. Out of total 438 mutation 
cases, 215 cases were pending for more than one year, 173 cases 
were pending for more than six months and 150 cases were 
pending for more than three months. For the above lapses, the 
Petitioner was called for explanation vide letter Nos.1181 dated 
13.03.2015 and 1572 dated 04.04.2015. However, the Petitioner 
did not respond to the same for which he was placed under 
suspension vide order No.12/Estt. Dated 17.04.2015 and

Page 9 of 16 
 
simultaneously charges was framed against him vide D.P. 
No.1853/Estt. dated 11.08.2015.  
15.  The Petitioner had submitted written statement in his defence 
and the Sub-Collector had been appointed as inquiring officer 
under Rule 15(4) of OCS (CC&A) Rule 1962 and the Tahasildar, 
Nilgiri was appointed as Marshalling Officer under Rule 15(5) of 
said Rules. 
16.  The Inquiring Officer i.e. the Sub-Collector, Nilgiri had 
enquired in to the charges giving reasonable opportunity to the 
Petitioner and submitted report on 27.02.2017. The inquiry 
report reveals that charges of negligence duty and disobedience 
order have been partly established and suggested to exonerate 
him from the charges and to issue warning not to be careless at 
any point of his service career and to perform his duty with 
utmost sincerity and commitment. 
17.  The Collector being the disciplinary authority disagreed with 
the suggestion of the inquiring officer with regard to exonerate 
him from charges and to issue warning. However, based on the 
allegation of Sarpanch, Shyamsundarpur G.P and public, the 
disciplinary authority inclined to impose punishment to stop 
one annual increment without cumulative effect and to treat his 
unauthorized period (suspension period) as leave due. The 
Petitioner was served with a copy of enquiry report and show 
cause under Sub- Rule 10(i)(b) of Rule 15 of OCS(CC&A) Rules,

Page 10 of 16 
 
1962 on proposed penalty as to why the above punishment was 
not to be imposed on him vide Letter No.2736/ Estt. dated 
18.12.2017 of the Collector, Balasore.  
18.  Since charges of negligence and disobedience of order has 
partly established during the enquiry by the Sub-Collector, the 
Collector, being the disciplinary authority, has the right to 
impose penalty differing the suggestion of the Inquiry officer 
which is just and proper. In view of the above fact and 
circumstances, he submitted that the Writ Petition being devoid 
of merit is liable to be dismissed. 
 
IV. CONCLUSION AND ORDER: 
19. Learned counsel for the Petitioner has contended that After 
reinstatement of the Petitioner, the Sub-Collector, Nilagiri being 
the Enquiring Officer of his proceeding, examined and Cross 
examined the documents and witnesses in reference to the 
Article of Charges. On conclusion, the Petitioner was not found 
guilty by the Enquiring Officer of the Charges and finally 
exonerated him by order dated 27.07.2017. In spite of the order 
of exoneration, the Additional District Magistrate being 
authorized by the Collector imposed punishment against the 
Petitioner vide order dated 19.03.2018 imposing penalty. He 
further contended that The Disciplinary Authority without 
calling for explanation from the delinquent, only on the basis of

Page 11 of 16 
 
report of Enquiry Officer, which is a statutory requirement, and 
not considering the materials on record, imposed punishment 
unilaterally on the Petitioner which is not permissible under the 
CCA Rules. 
20. Per contra, learned counsel for the State has clarified that  during 
the petitioner’s  incumbency as R.I., Santaragadia, he had 
neglected his duties towards disposal of Mutation Cases. Out of 
total 438 mutation cases, 215 cases were pending for more than 
one year, 173 cases were pending for more than six months and 
150 cases were pending for more than three months. For the 
above lapses, the Petitioner was called for explanation vide 
letter Nos.1181 dated 13.03.2015 and 1572 dated 04.04.2015. 
However, the Petitioner did not respond to the same for which 
he was placed under suspension vide order No.12/Estt. dated 
17.04.2015 and simultaneously charges was framed against him 
vide D.P. No.1853/Estt. dated 11.08.2015. 
21. The Inquiring Officer i.e. the Sub-Collector, Nilgiri had enquired 
in to the charges giving reasonable opportunity to the Petitioner 
and submitted report on 27.02.2017. From the inquiry report it 
revealed that charges of negligence duty and disobedience order 
was partly established and suggested to exonerate him from the 
charges and to issue warning not to be careless at any point of 
his service career and to perform his duty with utmost sincerity 
and commitment.

Page 12 of 16 
 
22.  The Collector being the disciplinary authority disagreed with 
the suggestion of the inquiring officer with regard to 
exoneration of the Petitioner from charges and issuance of  
warning. However, based on the allegation of Sarpanch, 
Shyamsundarpur G.P and public, the disciplinary authority 
inclined to impose punishment to stop one annual increment 
without cumulative effect and to treat his unauthorized period 
(suspension period) as leave due. The Petitioner was served 
with a copy of enquiry report and show cause under Sub- Rule 
10(i)(b) of Rule 15 of OCS(CC&A) Rules, 1962 on proposed 
penalty as to why the above punishment was not to be imposed 
on him vide Letter No.2736/ Estt. dated 18.12.2017 of the 
Collector, Balasore. 
23. It is pertinent to point out that when the Disciplinary Authority 
takes the assistance of an enquiry officer to conduct the enquiry 
into the charges and if any findings adverse to the interests of 
the charged official are recorded, then he has to be furnished 
with a copy of the enquiry officer's report, so as to enable him to 
make his further representation, on the findings of the enquiry 
officer, to the disciplinary authority and at that stage, when the 
Disciplinary Authority acknowledges the further representation, 
then he has to apply his mind and consider as to whether, the 
facts on the basis of which, disciplinary action has been taken, 
have been established, whether the charged official has been

Page 13 of 16 
 
provided with sufficient opportunity to defend the disciplinary 
proceedings, whether the procedure contemplated under the 
rules have been followed, whether there is sufficient ground to 
proceed further with the disciplinary proceedings, and then, he 
can record his final findings on the charges to remit the matter 
to the enquiry officer to rectify any procedural defect noticed 
with regard to the above aspects. However, if the enquiry officer 
records the findings in favour of the delinquent officer, holding 
that the charges as not proved, with or without any 
recommendation for exoneration and if the Disciplinary 
Authority disagrees with those findings, then, it is mandatory 
on the part of the Disciplinary Authority to form a tentative 
opinion for disagreeing with the findings of the enquiry officer. 
But, if the Disciplinary Authority, instead of recording a 
tentative opinion with reasons, for disagreement, proceeds to 
hold him guilty of the charges and thereafter, issue notice to the 
charged official, then it is nothing but a post-decisional hearing. 
It should also be borne in mind that principles of natural justice 
require that before the disciplinary authority records his final 
finding on the charges, he has to examine various aspects stated 
supra. But, without examining the same, if the Disciplinary 
Authority arrives at a final finding on the charges as proved, 
and thereafter, call upon the charged official to offer his further 
representation on the finding and also on the procedural

Page 14 of 16 
 
aspects, then it is only an empty formality, for the reason, there 
is not only a post decisional hearing on the findings, but it is 
also a blot on the procedural aspect. In the case at hand, the 
Disciplinary Authority has not only recorded his reasons for 
disagreeing with the findings of the enquiry officer, but has also 
arrived at the conclusion, holding the charges as proved. 
24. In P.Govindan v. State of Tamil Nadu 1, a Division Bench has 
considered a case as to whether recording a conclusion on the 
charges, at the stage of issuance of notice, would cause prejudice 
to the charged official and whether it satisfies principles of 
natural justice. In the reported judgment, the Disciplinary 
Authority, after differing with the enquiry officer, issued a show 
cause notice to the abovesaid official with a pre-determined 
mind, holding that the charges as proved. While testing the 
correctness of the abovesaid order, the Division Bench of this 
Court held that: 
“12. The Supreme Court in the case of Punjab 
National Bank and Ors. v. Kunj Behari Misra 
and Ors.2, held that in a departmental proceedings, 
what is of ultimate importance is a finding of the 
disciplinary authority. In the context of such 
seriousness, the Supreme Court held that principles 
of natural justice would demand that the 
disciplinary authority, which is deciding against the 
delinquent officer, must give an opportunity to rebut 
                                                 
1 2006 (1) MLJ 624 (Madras High Court) 
2 (1998) II LLJ 809 SC

Page 15 of 16 
 
the view taken, differing from that of the enquiry 
officer. It further held that whenever the disciplinary 
authority disagreed with the enquiry authority, 
then, it must record its tentative reasons for such 
disagreement and give the delinquent officer an 
opportunity to represent, before it records its 
findings. The judgment of the Supreme Court 
applies in all force to the case on hand, considering 
the fact that the first respondent's notice dated 
11.5.2001 is silent on the reasons for taking a 
different view from that of the enquiry officer. As 
submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner, it 
seemed to carry a conclusion premature that all five 
charges are held as proved. With such pre-emption 
on the conclusion, the very purpose of issuing a 
notice appears to be an empty formality. The purpose 
of issuing a notice is for enabling the delinquent 
officer an opportunity to persuade the disciplinary 
authority to accept the findings of the enquiry 
officer. Hence, the effectiveness of an opportunity is 
an absolute necessity, which must be patent even on 
the face of reading the notice, so that it would enable 
the delinquent officer to counter all the allegations, 
before the disciplinary authority takes further action, 
which may be prejudicial to the delinquent officer. 
The recording of a conclusion even at the notice 
stage is premature to give an impression to a 
delinquent officer that the entire exercise is a mere 
ritual before the ultimate order is passed. In the light 
of the facts found by the enquiry officer and the total 
absence of any material disclosed to form the basis 
for a different conclusion, we are constrained to 
accept the plea of the petitioner to set aside the order 
dated 11.5.2001."

Page 16 of 16 
 
25. In the light of the aforesaid discussion and the cases cited 
hereinabove, this Court hereby quashes the order dated 
19.03.2018 passed by the Opposite Party No.3/ Additional 
District Magistrate, Balasore imposing certain penalty on the 
Petitioner. This Court hereby directs the Opposite Party No.3 to 
provide the Petitioner with the right of fair hearing and prepare 
the subsequent order in accordance to law. The entire process be 
completed within three months from today.  
26.  Accordingly, this Writ Petition is disposed of.  
 
 
( Dr. S.K. Panigrahi )  
                                                                      Judge 
 
 
Orissa High Court, Cuttack, 
Dated the 3rd July, 2023/B. Jhankar