Page 1 of 9 
CRLA No.924 of 2019 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK 
CRLA No.924 of 2019 
In the matter of an Appeal under section 374(2) of the Code of Crimi nal 
Procedure, 1973 and from the judgment of conviction and order of 
sentence dated 26 th September, 2011 passed by the learned Ad hoc 
Additional Sessions Judge, FTC, Jagatsinghpur, in S.T. No.3 4/19 of 
2011. 
---- 
Tubu @ Anil Kumar Swain ….          Appellant 
 
-versus- 
State of Odisha  …. Respondent 
Appeared in this case by Hybrid Arrangement 
(Virtual/Physical Mode): 
 For Appellant - Mr.Rajib Bihari Mishra 
     Advocate 
 For Respondent -  Mr.S.K. Nayak, 
     Addl. Government Advocate 
     Mr.P.K.Nanda 
     Advocate for the Informant 
CORAM: 
MR. JUSTICE D.DASH 
DR. JUSTICE S.K.PANIGRAHI 
Date of Hearing : 17.05.2023        :      Date of Judgment:21.06.2023  
D.Dash,J. The Appellant, by filing this Appeal has challenged 
judgment of conviction and order of sentence dated 26 th September, 
2011 passed by the learned Ad hoc Additional Sessions Ju dge, FTC, 
Jagatsinghpur, in S.T. No.34/19 of 2011 corresponding out of G.R. Case 
No.690 of 2010 arising out of Raghunathpur P.S. Case No.69 of 2010 of

{{ 2 }} 
 
Page 2 of 9 
CRLA No.924 of 2019 
 
the court of learned Sub-Divisional Judicial Magistrate (S.D.J.M.),  
Jagatsinghpur.  
  By the same, the Appellant (accused) has been convicted for 
commission of offence under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 
1860 (for short called as 8the IPC9). Accordingly, he has been sentenced 
to undergo imprisonment for life and pay fine of Rs.10,000/- (Rup ees 
Ten Thousand), in default to undergo further imprisonment f or one (1) 
year with the stipulation that the fine amount, if realized, wo uld be paid 
to the Informant (P.W.7), who happens to be nephew of Surenderanat h 
(deceased).  
2. The prosecution case is that, Surenderanath Maharana (deceased), 
who happens to be the elder father of the Informant namely, Asit Kumar 
Maharana (P.W.7) was taking the tea in the tea stall of one Basanta 
Sahoo. On 15.10.2010 during morning hours, it is stated  that accused 
came there and dealt blows by means of spade on his face, neck and 
head and thus intentionally caused his death. The Informant (P.W .7) 
thereafter, presented a written report with the Inspector-In- Charge (IIC), 
Raghunathpur P.S. (P.W.8). Receiving the said written report, the IIC, 
treated the same as F.I.R., registered the case. Having done so, he 
carried on the investigation himself. He examined the Informant-P.W.7 
and other witnesses, he also visited the spot and prepared sp ot map, 
Ext.9. He then held inquest over the dead body of the deceased and  
prepared the report in presence of the witnesses which is Ext.3. The 
blood stained and sample earth were collected and seized under se izure 
list, Ext.4. The dead body of the deceased was sent for postmorte m 
examination by issuing necessary requisition and the wearing apparels 
of the deceased were thereafter seized under proper seizure list. The

{{ 3 }} 
 
Page 3 of 9 
CRLA No.924 of 2019 
 
accused being arrested, gave his statement and led the I.O. (P.W.8) and 
others to the place where he had kept the spade and wearing apparels  
and gave recovery of the same which were then seized under seizure list. 
The incriminating articles were then sent for chemical examinati on and 
report to that effect was received. On completion of investigation , Final 
Form was submitted by the I.O.(P.W.8), placing the accused to face the 
trial for the said offence.   
3. Learned SDJM, Jagatsinghpur, having received the Final For m as 
above took cognizance of said offence and after observing the 
formalities, committed the case to the Court of Sessions that is h ow the 
Trial commenced by framing the charge for the said offence against t he 
accused.   
4. In the Trial, the prosecution has examined in total eight (8) 
witnesses. As already stated, the Informant who happens to be the 
nephew of the deceased is P.W.7. The Doctor who had conducted 
postmortem over the dead body of the deceased is P.W.2. P.Ws. 1, 3, 4 
and 5 are the important eye witnesses for the prosecution. The 
Investigating Officer has come to the witness box as P.W.8.  
5. The prosecution besides leading the evidence by examining the  
above witnesses has proved several documents, which have bee n 
admitted in evidence and marked Exts.1 to 12. Out of those as al ready 
stated the F.I.R. is Ext.8 whereas the postmortem report as well a s the 
inquest report as Ext.3 and Ext.1 respectively. The Chemical Examiner9s 
report has been proved as Ext.12 and the statement of the accused 
leading the police and other witnesses in giving the recovery of the 
weapon and his wearing apparels has been admitted in evidence and

{{ 4 }} 
 
Page 4 of 9 
CRLA No.924 of 2019 
 
marked Ext.5. In the Trial, the wearing apparels of the deceased as well 
as of the accused have been produced as Material Objects (M.O.-I to 
M.O.-IV). 
6. The plea of the defence is that of complete denial and false 
implication. However, in the Trial, the accused has not tendered  any 
evidence either oral and documentary. 
7. Learned counsel for the Appellant (accused), submitted that t he 
appreciation of the evidence let in by the prosecution, as has been made 
by the Trial Court, is not at all at par with the standard as  is required to 
return a finding of guilt against the accused in intentionally  causing the 
death of the deceased, namely, Surendranath Moharana. He further 
submitted that the evidence of four witnesses, i.e., P.Ws.1, 3, 4 & 5 have 
not at all been examined keeping one by the side of the other an d 
variance in their evidence as to the happenings of the inciden t and the 
role played by the accused as also other details, which make the e ntire 
prosecution case unbelievable have been quietly ignored. He fur ther 
submitted that all these above witnesses being highly i nterested for the 
success of the prosecution and in some way or the other being n ot in 
good terms with the accused when their evidence are irreconcilabl e on 
material aspects of the case and also do not receive corroboration from 
independent sources, the Trial Court ought not to have hel d the accused 
guilty for commission of offence under section 302 of the I.P.C. 
8. Learned counsel for the Respondent-State, refuting the above 
submission, contended all in favour of guilt against the accus ed, as has 
been returned by the Trial Court. According to him, the eye witnes ses 
(P.Ws.1, 3, 4 & 5) have provided the graphic details relating to the

{{ 5 }} 
 
Page 5 of 9 
CRLA No.924 of 2019 
 
incident right from the beginning till the end, which cove rs the role 
played by the accused in dealing the fatal blows upon the deceased,  
which has caused his death. He submitted that barring few min or 
variations in the evidence of those witnesses, there is neither any  other 
infirmity nor the variance on material aspect of the incident incl uding 
the part played by the accused therein. He further submitted that  the 
Trial Court has gone for a detail analysis of the evidence of all  those 
witnesses and did commit no mistake in ultimately arriving  at a 
conclusion that the prosecution has proved the charge against th e 
accused beyond reasonable doubt by leading clear, cogent and 
acceptable evidence. He further submitted that the evidence of P.Ws.5 & 
8, having rightly been taken by the Trail Court into con fidence, the 
finding as to the recovery of spade and the wearing apparels of the 
accused from the place know to him and within his special knowle dge 
has been proved and, therefore, the disclosure statement of the accus ed 
to that effect too stands to corroborate the evidence of the eye witnesses.   
9. Keeping in view the submissions made, we have carefully read 
the judgment passed by the Trial Court. We have also gone thro ugh the 
deposition of all the witnesses (P.Ws.1 to 8) and perused the d ocuments 
admitted in evidence and marked Exts.1 to 12. 
10. One Co-villager of the accused and the deceased, who is the eye 
witness to the occurrence, has been examined as P.W.1. His evidence i s 
that in the year 2010 on the Mahastami day, he was present in the tea 
stall of Basanta Sahoo at Gualipur Chhak and it was around 11 .00 a.m. 
He further states that with him, Madhab Swain (P.W.4), Pratap (P.W.5), 
Bidyadhar and others were present. It is stated that they were ta king tea 
when the deceased was inside the tea stall. He has stated that  the

{{ 6 }} 
 
Page 6 of 9 
CRLA No.924 of 2019 
 
accused came there holding a spade and started abusing the deceased in 
filthy languages. He has further deposed that when the deceased came 
out of the tea stall, this accused suddenly dealt a blow by mean s of that 
spade on his face, which resulted his fall. He has further stated that the 
accused thereafter dealt blows repeatedly on the head, face and neck of 
the deceased for which the deceased sustained profuse bleeding injuries.  
  The Doctor (P.W.2), who had conducted the autopsy over the 
dead body of the deceased, has found four lacerates wound present  on 
the head, face and neck etc, which clearly supports the version of P.W.1 
not only as to the seat of injury but also as to the natu re as well as their 
numbers. P.W.1 has been cross-examined, but we find that he has firmly 
withstood the cross-examination. He has even gone to state the colour of 
the lungi that the deceased was wearing at the relevant time and has  
stated that the deceased had put on a napkin on his should er. His house, 
being situated at a distance of 20 cubits from the spot, at t hat time his 
presence in the tea stall at that chhak is seen to be quite nat ural. He has 
also stated that his house as well as the house of the accused  are equi 
distant from that tea stall and one has to cross 4 to 5 houses  to reach the 
tea stall from his house as well as from the house of the accused. Simply 
because he has not been able to give the length and breadth of th e spade 
with which the accused as per his evidence caused the injuries  upon the 
deceased we are not in a position to view his evidence with su spicion 
when no other strong material to support surfaces.  
 The tea stall owner is P.W.3. His evidence is that the deceased, 
having arrived at his tea stall, had disclosed that while t he accused was 
cutting the chakunda tree situated over the Government land, he,  having 
raised objection, there was altercation between him and the accused. He 
further states that at that time, the accused was passing nearby  and 10 to

{{ 7 }} 
 
Page 7 of 9 
CRLA No.924 of 2019 
 
15 minutes thereafter, the accused came with a spade in his hand, hurl ed 
obscene words aiming the deceased and dealt blow on his neck and  that 
blow on the neck when resulted the fall of the deceased, the accuse d did 
not stop there but went on to give two more blows on th e face and head 
of the deceased causing profuse bleeding injuries. He further st ates that 
after such assault, the assault took to his heels. Having carefully read the 
depositions of the witnesses more particularly the cross-examination  
part, we are really shocked to find that although some suggestio ns have 
been thrown to the witnesses those are completely without any basis and 
thus have not been proved through the I.O. (P.W.8). This witness has 
also stated the presence of other important witnesses, i.e., Babaj i 
(P.W.1) and Madhaba (P.W.4) and others. The witness, having been 
asked regarding the size of the injury when has not been able to  say the 
same, it is of absolutely no benefit to the defence in impeaching  his 
evidence. He has even given the suggestion to be having no t ea stall at 
the place when, we find that the overwhelming evidence on that s core 
coming from the lips of other witnesses and more-so, those witn esses 
have not been suggested the said fact that in fact no tea stall o f P.W.3 is 
there in that Chhak they have specifically stated. 
 As per the evidence of P.W.4, he, P.Ws.1 & 3 were present in the 
tea stall and had seen the occurrence. He has further stated that  when 
they were in the tea stall of P.W.3, deceased arrived and disclosed ab out 
cutting of the chakuda tree standing over the Government land and  his 
raising objection to the same. He has stated in the same vein, as has been 
stated by P.Ws.1 & 3 that the accused during that time, was passing  
nearby and coming with a spade dealt a blow on the right neck of the 
deceased resulting his fall and thereafter, he dealt two more blo ws on 
the right side face and head of the deceased. The evidence of P.W.4 is

{{ 8 }} 
 
Page 8 of 9 
CRLA No.924 of 2019 
 
wholly consistent with the evidence of P.Ws.1 & 3. This witness, having 
been cross-examined, we too find no such material to have bee n elicited 
to doubt his presence at the tea stall in seeing the incident when also 
nothing has been brought from this witness (P.W.3) as well as P.W.4 
that they had any reason to falsely implicate the  accused. I t has also 
been the evidence of P.W.5 that he was there in the tea stall when the 
incident took place and first of all, the deceased came to discl ose about 
his raising objection to the cutting of the chakunda tree by acc used and 
shortly thereafter the accused, having arrived with the spade, assaulted  
the deceased by giving a blow on his neck and then after his fall, it is 
said that he gave two more blows. During cross-examination, the  
witness has further described that the accused dealt the first  blow 
standing on the front towards the left of the deceased and as then there 
was no chance for anyone to intervene and immediately thereafter, si nce 
he gave two other blows, the witness could not take the risk of doing 
anything in the situation to save the deceased. The explanation under the 
circumstance being quite natural, cannot be brushed aside. 
 P.W.7 is the informant, who happens to be the nephew of the 
deceased. He has stated to have gone to the place getting the information 
about the assault upon his elder father Surendra (deceased). It is  his 
specific evidence that then P.W.1, P.W.3 and others were present and  
from them, he came to know about the incident. He has reported th e 
matter in writing before the I.I.C. (I.O-P.W.18) and that having been 
treated as FIR, he has proved it as Ext.8. When all the witnesses have 
stated that the accused left the place holding that spade, this w itness has 
also stated to have not seen the spade lying near the place where hi s 
elder father was lying dead.

{{ 9 }} 
 
Page 9 of 9 
CRLA No.924 of 2019 
 
 With all these rock solid evidence, being there on record and  
when after due scrutiny of the same, we find absolutely no infi rmity 
therein to raise any doubt over their version that while Suren dra was 
telling them about the incident, which had just taken before his arrival at 
the tea stall of P.W.3, accused came and dealt a spade blow and th en 
after his fall, gave two more blows, which have led to his death, in  our 
opinion, the Trial Court has rightly held that the prosecuti on has 
established the charge against the accused beyond reasonable doub t by 
leading clear, cogent and acceptable evidence. 
11. In the result, the Appeal stands dismissed. The judgment of 
conviction and order of sentence dated 26 th September, 2011 passed by 
the learned Ad hoc Additional Sessions Judge, FTC, Jagatsingh pur, in 
S.T. No.34/19 of 2011 are hereby confirmed.  
           (D. Dash) 
      Judge 
  Dr.S.K.Panigrahi, J     I agree. 
 
             (Dr.S.K.Panigrahi) 
                  Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
Basu