Page 1 of 10 
CRLA No.633 of 2017 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK 
CRLA No.633 OF 2017  
 
In the matter of an Appeal under section-374(2) of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 and from the judgment of c onviction and 
order of sentence dated 17.07.2017 passed by the le arned Sessions 
Judge, Jagatsinghpur in C.T. Case No.158 of 2013. 
---- 
 
Sambhu Nath & Another …. 
          
Appellants 
 
-versus- 
State of Odisha  …. Respondent 
Appeared in this case by Hybrid Arrangement 
(Virtual/Physical Mode: 
================================================== 
 For Appellants - Mr. A. Tripathy, Advocate. 
 For Respondent  -  Mr.  S.S. Mohapatra,  
     Additional Standing Counsel.  
 CORAM: 
 
MR. JUSTICE D.DASH 
DR. JUSTICE S.K. PANIGRAHI 
 
DATE OF HEARING : 09.05.2023 : DATE OF JUDGMENT:21. 06.2023 
D.Dash,J.  The Appellants, by filing this Appeal has challenge d the 
judgment of conviction and order of sentence dated 17.07.2017 passed 
by the learned Sessions Judge, Jagatsinghpur in C.T . Case No.158 of 
2013 arising out of G.R. Case No.607 of 2012 corres ponding to 
Jagatsinghpur P.S. Case No.132 of 2012 of the Court  of learned Sub-
Divisional Judicial Magistrate, (S.D.J.M.), Jagatsinghpur.  
  By the same, the Appellants (accused persons) hav e been 
convicted for commission of offence under section-1 48/341/302/149 
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short called as  ‘the IPC’).

{{ 2 }} 
 
Page 2 of 10 
CRLA No. 633 of2017 
 
Accordingly, they have been sentenced to undergo im prisonment for 
life for the offence under section-302 read with section-149 of the IPC; 
rigorous imprisonment for three years of the offence under section-148 
of the IPC; and simple imprisonment for one month f or the offence 
under section-341 read with section-149 of the IPC with the stipulation 
that the sentences would run concurrently.  
2. The prosecution case is that two years before the  incident for 
which the present case has been initiated i.e. on 2 8.06.2010, these 
accused persons with others had set fire to the hou se of Arakhita Nath, 
the husband of Trupti Rekha Nath (Informant-P.W.1) and since then, 
they were threatening to kill Arakhita and his wife , Trupti Rekha 
(Informant-P.W.1) by giving out that since they wer e the close 
associates of the Member of Legislative Assembly no  one could do 
any harm to them. Arakhita and his wife (P.W.1) in view of such threat 
being to their life and property were residing in v illage Atamala by 
taking a house on rent. Arakahita was working as a Mason and during 
the period, when the occurrence took place, he had been engaged in 
construction of a temple of the village Deity at Kh amango. On 
23.06.2012 around 10 am, Arakhita (deceased) was go ing to the 
temple in connection with the construction work, wh en these accused 
persons with others namely, Sambhu Nath, Abhaya Nat h, Rabindra 
Nath, Ashok Nath, Fakir Nath, Sadasib Nath, Debaraj  Nath, Lingaraj 
Nath, Jagu Nath, Sarada Prasad Nath, Abhimanyu Nath , Bijay Nath, 
Sanjay Nath, Uma Nath and Tuni Nath forming an unla wful assembly 
being armed with deadly weapon such as Khanda (swor d), Bhujali, 
Tenta and Farsa encircled Arakhita near canal emban kment of village 
Khanmango and chased him. It is stated that they th en dealt blows by

{{ 3 }} 
 
Page 3 of 10 
CRLA No. 633 of2017 
 
means of deadly weapons held by them all over the b ody of Arakhita, 
causing injuries on the different parts of his body . The deceased 
receiving such blows raised shout. Hearing the shout, the mother of the 
deceased namely, Pramila (P.W.3) rushed to the spot  and saw this 
accused persons as well as others dealing blows on her son Arakhita 
using the weapons held by them. She too was then th reatened to be 
killed. So, the mother of the deceased (P.W.3) bein g frightened, left 
the spot and informed the matter to the wife of the  deceased 
(Informant-P.W.1), rushed to the spot and saw her h usband (deceased) 
lying on the ground with bleeding injuries all over  his body. The 
deceased was then shifted by the villagers and the Gramarakhi (P.W.5) 
to the District Headquarter Hospital (DHQ), Jagatsi nghpur. He was 
declared dead by the Doctor present there. Informat ion in writing 
being lodged before the Inspector-In-Charge (IIC), Jagatsinghpur P.S., 
he immediately treated the same as the F.I.R. and t hen registering the 
case, took up investigation.  
 The Investigating officer (I.O.-P.W.8) immediately , examined 
the Informant (P.W.1) and other witnesses. He then went to the DHQ 
Hospital and deputed one Assistant Sub-Inspector of  Police namely, 
Rabindra Senapati to guard the spot. He saw the present deceased lying 
dead on a stretcher on the verandah of a room in th e DHQ Hospital 
with multiple injuries on his person. There he held  the inquest over the 
dead body of the deceased in presence of the witnes ses and prepared 
the report, Ext.2. He then issued requisition for P ostmortem 
examination over the dead body. He also visited the  spot and prepared 
the spot map, Ext.5 in presence of the witnesses. F rom the spot, he 
seized several incriminating articles and thereafte r seized the wearing

{{ 4 }} 
 
Page 4 of 10 
CRLA No. 633 of2017 
 
apparels of the deceased on production by the Const able, who had 
deputed for the purpose under seizure list, Ext.6. Thereafter, the I.O. 
(P.W.8) arrested the accused Kanhu Nath, Ashok Kuma r Nath and 
forwarded them in custody to the Court. He received  the Postmortem 
examination report and submitted the Final Form.  
3. The learned SDJM, Jagatsinghpur having received t he Final 
Form as above took cognizance of said offences and after observing 
the formalities, committed the case to the Court of  Sessions, sending 
the accused Kanhu and that has been disposed of by the learned 
Additional Sessions Judge, Jagatsinghpur. The case against present 
accused persons having been split up, after their a ppearance, it was 
committed to the Court of Sessions in the second ph ase and 
accordingly, the Trial was held.  
4. In the Trial, the prosecution has examined in tot al ten (10) 
witnesses. The wife of the deceased who is the Info rmant, who lodged 
the F.I.R., Ext.1 has been examined as P.W.1. The w itnesses to the 
occurrence are P.Ws. 2, 3, 6 and 7. This P.W.3 is t he mother-in-law of 
the deceased and mother of P.W.1; whereas the P.Ws.  2, 6 and 7 are 
the villagers. The Doctor who had conducted Postmor tem examination 
over the dead body of the deceased has been examine d as P.W.9 and 
the Investigating Officer, who had conducted major portion of the 
investigation has been examined as P.W.8 when the other Investigating 
Officer who came to the picture at the end in submi tting the Final 
Form has been examined as P.W.10. 
5. The prosecution besides leading the evidence by exa mining the 
above witnesses has proved several documents, which  have been

{{ 5 }} 
 
Page 5 of 10 
CRLA No. 633 of2017 
 
admitted in evidence and marked Exts.1 to 8. Out of  those as already 
stated, the F.I.R. is Ext.1 where as inquest report  is Ext.2. The 
Postmortem report submitted by P.W.9 has been admit ted in evidence 
and marked Ext.7 and the spot map is Ext.5.  
6. The case of the defence is that of complete denia l and false 
implication. The accused persons, in support of the  plea, have 
examined one witness namely, Baidhar Kandi as D.W.1. 
 7. The Trial Court upon examination of the evidence o f the Doctor, 
P.W.9 and on going through his report, Ext.7 as als o the evidence of 
other witnesses including that of the I.O. (P.W.8) has arrived at a 
conclusion that the death of Arakhita was homicidal . Having said so, 
the evidence of the prosecution witnesses being sca nned, the Trial 
Court has held the accused persons guilty for commi ssion of offence 
under section-148/341/302/149 of the IPC.  
 8. Coming to the nature of death of Arakhita, on goi ng through the 
evidence of Doctor, who had conducted postmortem ex amination over 
the dead body of Arakhita i.e. P.W.9, we find that during Postmortem 
examination, he has noted nineteen (19) injuries  a ll over the body of 
the deceased. The injuries are on the head, face, h and, palm, chest, 
back, the neck etc. His evidence is that all said i njuries are antemortem 
in nature and the death was due to shock and haemor rhage resulting 
from the injury to the vital organs. His specific e vidence is that the 
death of the evidence is homicidal in nature. We fi nd that such 
evidence of the Doctor (P.W.9) has not all been cha llenged, which 
remains the position before us. Besides the above, what P.W.9 has 
stated, we find that his report, Ext.7 is very clea r on that score and it

{{ 6 }} 
 
Page 6 of 10 
CRLA No. 633 of2017 
 
finds mention of all those injuries with their size s and seats which 
would show that the deceased was inflicted with all  these injuries over 
his body by several weapons and by several persons.  
  The Investigating Officer, P.W.8 in his inquest r eport, Ext.2 has 
also noted such injuries and that has also been the  evidence of other 
witnesses who have seen deceased with bleeding inju ries all over his 
body, being caused by lethal weapons. Base on such overwhelming 
evidence remaining wholly unchallenged and un-impea ched; we are 
not faced with any difficulty at all in accepting t he finding of the Trial 
Court that Arakhita met homicidal death leading fro m these injuries 
inflicted upon him by means of lethal weapons.  
 9. Learned Counsel for the Appellants submitted that  the evidence 
of the prosecution witnesses that these accused persons were assaulting 
the deceased by means of lethal weapons which thus ought not to have 
relied upon the Trial Court without deeper scrutiny  as they are highly 
interested witnesses. He further submitted that the  Trial Court has 
failed to appreciate the evidence of eye witnesses in which according 
to him, major discrepancies. It was submitted that the evidence of 
P.W.3, who is the star witness for the prosecution being projected as 
the eye witnesses to the occurrence and so also the  evidence of P.W.7 
are not at all reliable as they have given the exag gerated version as to 
the said happenings and have gone on developing the case from time to 
time. In this connection, he has invited our attent ion to the depositions 
of all those prosecution witnesses, i.e. P.Ws. 2, 3 , 6 and 7 in showing 
as to how they are surfaces the discrepancies for w hich their evidence 
cannot be held to be trustworthy and thus unsafe to base the conviction 
upon the accused persons.

{{ 7 }} 
 
Page 7 of 10 
CRLA No. 633 of2017 
 
 10 . Learned Counsel for the State-Respondent on the o ther hand 
submitted all in favour of the finding returned by the Trial Court 
holding accused persons guilty for the above noted offences. 
According to him, the evidence of P.Ws. 2, 3, 6 and  7 are quite 
consistent as to what role have been played by thes e accused persons 
and the blows inflicted by them with the lethal wea pons which they 
were held in the relevant time. He submitted that d espite scathing 
cross-examination, as no such material surfaces even to remotely doubt 
as to the presence of these witnesses in the nearby  area in seeing the 
incident.  
 11. Keeping in view the submissions made; we have caref ully read 
the judgment of conviction. We have also extensivel y travelled 
through the depositions of all the witnesses i.e. P .W.1 to P.W.10 and 
have perused the documents which have been marked as Exts.1 to 8.  
 12. In order to address the rival submission as above n oted in 
judging the sustainability of the finding of guilty  as against these 
accused persons as has been returned upon the Trial Court, we are now 
called upon to examine the evidence let in by the prosecution. 
  Admittedly, the P.W.1, who is the Informant and h ad lodged the 
F.I.R., Ext.1 was not present at the scene of occur rence nor in the 
nearby area as to have in seen the occurrence. She has stated at the 
relevant time, she was in the Jagatsinghpur Hospita l where she was 
working as Asha Worker. It is her evidence that she has heard from her 
mother who is examined as P.W.3. The accused person s with his 
family members namely, Sambhu Nath, Abhaya Nath, De braj Nath 
and Sarada as well as his brothers had killed Arakh ita who happens to

{{ 8 }} 
 
Page 8 of 10 
CRLA No. 633 of2017 
 
be her husband. So, the source of knowledge on the happening of the 
incident as against her husband for this P.W.1 is h er mother i.e. P.W.3. 
It has been stated that by P.W.3 that at the releva nt time, she had been 
to Nalabandha (canal embankment) to attend call of nature and at that 
time, accused Rabindra, Sarada and Ashok came in a motor cycle. She 
has further stated that accused Ashok dealt a Katur i blow on the head 
of the deceased and accused-Rabindra assaulted by m eans of sword on 
the neck of the deceased and Sarada Nath assaulted the deceased by 
means of bhujali. She has also stated that at that time, this accused 
Sambhu, Abhaya Kanta and Debraj being armed with de adly weapons 
like Katuri, Farsa etc and come out from the area, densely populated 
bushes. It is her evidence that all of them brutall y assaulted the 
deceased and chased the deceased and further assaul ted him by means 
of deadly weapons. Since she has stated that she wi th Sudarsan, P.W.2 
had come to the medical; learned Counsel for the Appellants submitted 
that the presence of this witness P.W.3 as well as P.W.2 become 
doubtful as P.W.2 is not stating anything as regard s the presence of 
P.W.3, who too is also not stating anything as rega rds the presence of 
P.W.2. At this stage, when we turn our attention to  the evidence of 
P.W.2, we find that he has stated that on that day at the relevant time, 
he was returning after leaving his wife at village Purunagada and on 
the way was urinating, and then having heard heard screaming sound, 
rushed to the spot and saw accused Sambhu Nath, Abh aya Nath @ 
Abhi (present Appellants), Sarada Nath, Ashok Nath,  Rabindra and 
Debraj Nath assaulting the deceased by means of Swo rd, Bhujali and 
Katuri. He is no doubt a chance witness but then, h is presence in the 
area near to the place of occurrence, in view of th e reason given by

{{ 9 }} 
 
Page 9 of 10 
CRLA No. 633 of2017 
 
him as regards his presence at the place cannot be doubted only for 
that reason as his evidence as to the part of the i ncident seen by him is 
not shaken or no such doubtful features appear to p ut his evidence on 
that score as unreliable. When incident has not hap pened just for a 
fractions of second and here when different persons  arriving at 
different point of time in close proximity have pla yed their role in the 
incident, the witnesses are not expected to say as to every tit bit of the 
incident from the beginning till end but only what he had seen on his 
arrival till leaving. Therefore, if we do not get f rom the evidence all 
these witnesses as to exactly who did what, that wo n’t make their 
evidence unbelievable. The submission of the learne d Counsel for the 
Appellants with regard to the discrepancy on import ant factual aspect, 
under the circumstance, does not merit consideration.  
 13.  The evidence of P.W.6 is that he had seen accused Sambhu 
Nath, Rabindra Nath, Ashok Nath, Debendra Nath and Babuni Nath 
along with others assaulting the deceased by means of Katuri and 
sword. Furthermore, we cannot loose sight of the fa ct that the 
allegations from the very beginning remains that th e investigation was 
not going in right direction and, therefore, not mu ch of emphasis can 
be given to those omissions in the statement of wit nesses recorded 
during investigation unless those relate to the ext remely important 
aspect which is not noticed by us.  
 14.  P.W.7 has also stated to have seen accused persons  with others 
assaulting the deceased by dangerous weapons. Altho ugh the defence 
has suggested to P.W.3 that she had not stated befo re the police to 
have seen the incident, that has not been proved th rough P.W.8, the

{{ 10 }} 
 
Page 10  of 10 
CRLA No. 633 of2017 
 
I.O., who rather has stated that P.W.3 had very wel l stated before him 
to have seen the incident. We find that no such mat erial has been 
elicited from the lips of all these above eye witne sses to discredit them 
or to doubt their version as such for a moment as t o their presence at 
the relevant time in witnessing the occurrence and especially as 
regards the role of these accused persons. Therefor e, the finding of the 
Trial Court that the accused persons are guilty for  commission of 
offences as aforesaid and the prosecution has estab lished the charges 
against these accused persons beyond reasonable dou bt by leading 
clear, cogent and acceptable evidence, in our view,  have to receive the 
seal of affirmation.  
15.  In the result, the Appeal stands dismissed. The judgment of 
conviction and order of sentence dated 17 
th  July, 2017 passed by the 
learned Sessions Judge, Jagatsinghpur in C.T. Case No.158 of 2013 are 
hereby confirmed.   
 
 
            (D. Dash), 
   Judge. 
 
 Dr. S.K. Panigrahi, J.  I Agree. 
 
 
       (Dr.S.K. Panigrahi), 
Judge. 
Narayan