MACA  Nos.613 & 524 of 2019                  Page 1  of 9 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK 
 
MACA  Nos.613 & 524 of 2019 
 
(From the judgment dated 27 th  April, 2019 passed by learned 3 rd 
Addl.District Judge-cum-4th  M.A.C.T., Cuttack in M.A.C. Case No.831 
of 2016/221 of 2017) 
  
 
MACA Nos.613 & 524 of 2019 
 
The Sr. Divisional Manager,  
M/s. New India Assurance Co. Ltd.            (In MACA No.613/2019)  
Sabita Dandasena and Others           (In MACA No.5 24/2019)  
 ….    Appellants  
   
               
 -versus- 
 
 
Sabita Dandasena and Others           (In MACA No.6 13/2019) 
Karanam Venkata Ramana  and Another  (In MACA No.524/2019) 
 …. 
 Respondents  
 
Advocate(s) appeared in this case:- 
               For Appellants : Mr. G.P. Dutta, Adv ocate (in MACA 
No.613/2019) 
 
Mr. D.C. Dey Advocate (in MACA 
No.524/2019) 
 
               For Respondents : Mr. D.C. Dey, coun sel for 
Respondent No.1 (in MACA 
No.613/2019) 
 
Mr. G.P. Dutta, counsel for 
Respondent No.2 (in MACA 
No.524/2019)

MACA  Nos.613 & 524 of 2019         Page 2 of 9 
 
  CORAM: JUSTICE B.P. ROUTRAY                                
JUDGMENT 
1st  June, 2023 
                 B.P. Routray, J. 
                  1.   Both the appeals, one (MACA No.524 of 2019) filed  by the 
claimants and the other (MACA No.613 of 2019) filed by the insurance 
company, are against the same impugned award and as  such are heard 
together and disposed of by this common judgment.  
  2.  The claimants, who are the wife and children of the deceased 
namely Bishnu Charan Dandasena have filed MAC Case No.831 of 
2016/221 of 2017 for death of the deceased in a mot or vehicular 
accident dated 26 th  October 2015. Their case is that while the decease d 
was going to office in his Activa scooter, the offe nding truck bearing 
registration number AP-35-X-8799 coming from behind  in rash and 
negligent manner dashed him causing his death. The deceased was 
serving as the Divisional Manager, LIC of India, Sa mbalpur. The 
tribunal upon adjudication directed for payment of compensation of 
Rs.83,46,479/- along with interest @ 6% per annum f or the date of 
filing of the claim application, i.e. 7 th  December, 2016 in favour of the 
claimants.

MACA  Nos.613 & 524 of 2019         Page 3 of 9 
 
  3.  The involvement of the offending truck and ne gligence on the 
part of its driver are though not disputed before t his court, but the 
challenges are mainly on the quantum of compensatio n. The claimants 
have prayed for enhancement of the same whereas the  insurer has 
prayed to reduce it. According to the insurer, the daughter of the 
deceased is now receiving Rs.23,700/- per month fro m rehabilitation 
appointment and the widow is getting family pension  of Rs.35,000/- 
per month and therefore, such amounts received by t he claimants are 
liable to be adjusted from the loss of dependency t o disentitle them 
from getting benefits of future prospects. On the o ther hand the 
claimants are urging against deduction of Rs.20,00, 000/- received by 
them towards Group Personal Accident Policy. As per  the claimants 
such amount received from the employer of the decea sed is not liable 
for deduction.  
  4.  The deceased was 59 years old on the date of death and the 
tribunal determined his annual income at Rs.18,51,1 90/- taking into 
account the income mentioned in Form-16 for the Financial Year 2015-
16. No dispute is raised with regard to income of t he deceased. As 
stated earlier, the entire dispute is on deduction of such amount

MACA  Nos.613 & 524 of 2019         Page 4 of 9 
 
received towards Group Personal Accident Policy and  addition of 
future prospect.  
  5.  First dealing with the contentions raised by the Insurance 
Company that, future prospect is not liable to be a dded to the income 
of the deceased, the same are found without substan ce. What is 
submitted by the insurer that family pension amount  as well as salary 
received from rehabilitation employment by the wido w and daughter 
respectively would deprive them from the benefits of addition of future 
prospect is an inconceivable argument. There is no merit in this 
submission. This would not disentitle them from get ting the benefits of 
future prospects. Similarly, the submissions made b y the claimants 
against deduction of Rs.20,00,000/- are also meritl ess. Admittedly, a 
sum of Rs.20,00,000/- was paid to the widow of the deceased towards 
Group Personal Accident Policy. The insurer examine d O.P.W.1, the 
Administrative Officer of LIC of India at Sambalpur , and produced the 
document (Ext.B) in this regard, which is not dispu ted by the 
claimants. Said O.P.W.1 has stated that the premium  for the policy is 
not paid or deducted from the salary of the concerned employee.  
 6.  The position of law to answer the contentions of both parties  
would be clear from following discussions.

MACA  Nos.613 & 524 of 2019         Page 5 of 9 
 
  It has been observed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court  in Helen C. 
Rebello v. Maharashtra SRTC, (1999) 1 SCC 90  that, family pension 
is all by the employee for the benefit of the famil y in the form of his 
contribution in terms of service conditions and hei rs receive family 
pension even otherwise than the accidental death. I n the case of United 
India Insurance Co. Ltd. v.  Patricia Jean Mahajan, (2002) 6 SCC 
281, it is expounded that there must be some co-relation  between the 
amount received and the accidental death. In the said case the deceased 
was a doctor and upon his death the widow received an amount of 
$.2,50,000/- on account of life insurance policies of the deceased . The 
relevant observations of the Supreme Court are as follows:- 
  “36. We are in full agreement with the observations  made in the 
case of Helen Rebello that principle of balancing b etween losses 
and gains, by reason of death, to arrive at the amo unt of 
compensation is a general rule, but what is more im portant is that 
such receipts by the claimants must have some corre lation with the 
accidental death by reason of which alone the claim ants have 
received the amounts. We do not think it would be n ecessary for us 
to go into the question of distinction made between  the provisions 
of the Fatal Accidents Act and the Motor Vehicles A ct. According 
to the decisions referred to in the earlier part of  this judgment, it is 
clear that the amount on account of social security  as may have 
been received must have a nexus or relation with th e accidental 
injury or death, so far to be deductible from the a mount of 
compensation. There must be some correlation betwee n the amount

MACA  Nos.613 & 524 of 2019         Page 6 of 9 
 
received and the accidental death or it may be in t he same sphere, 
absence (sic) the amount received shall not be dedu cted from the 
amount of compensation. Thus, the amount received o n account of 
insurance policy of the deceased cannot be deducted  from the 
amount of compensation though no doubt the receipt of the 
insurance amount is accelerated due to premature de ath of the 
insured. So far as other items in respect of which learned counsel 
for the Insurance Company has vehemently urged, for  example 
some allowance paid to the children, and Mrs. Patri cia Mahajan 
under the social security system, no correlation of  those receipts 
with the accidental death has been shown much less established. 
Apart from the fact that contribution comes from di fferent sources 
for constituting the fund out of which payment on a ccount of social 
security system is made, one of the constituents of  the fund is tax 
which is deducted from income for the purpose. We f eel that the 
High Court has rightly disallowed any deduction on account of 
receipts under the insurance policy and other recei pts under the 
social security system which the claimant would hav e also 
otherwise been entitled to receive irrespective of accidental death 
of Dr Mahajan. If the proposition “receipts from wh atever source” 
is interpreted so widely that it may cover all the receipts, which 
may come into the hands of the claimants, in view o f the mere 
death of the victim, it would only defeat the purpo se of the Act 
providing for just compensation on account of accid ental death. 
Such gains, maybe on account of savings or other in vestment etc. 
made by the deceased, would not go to the benefit o f the 
wrongdoer and the claimant should not be left worse  off, if he had 
never taken an insurance policy or had not made inv estments for 
future returns.”

MACA  Nos.613 & 524 of 2019         Page 7 of 9 
 
  7.  In Sebastiani Lakra and Others v. National Insurance 
Company Ltd., 2018 (4) TAC 367 (SC) , the Supreme Court taking note 
of various other decisions including Helen C. Rebello and Patricia 
Jean Mahajan (supra)  have held as follows:- 
“12. The law is well settled that deductions cannot  be allowed from 
the amount of compensation either on account of ins urance, or on 
account of pensionary benefits or gratuity or grant  of employment 
to a kin of the deceased. The main reason is that a ll these amounts 
are earned by the deceased on account of contractua l relations 
entered into by him with others. It cannot be said that these 
amounts accrued to the dependents or the legal heir s of the 
deceased on account of his death in a motor vehicle  accident. The 
claimants / dependents are entitled to ‘just compen sation’ under the 
Motor Vehicles Act as a result of the death of the deceased in a 
motor vehicle accident. Therefore, the natural coro llary is that the 
advantage which accrues to the estate of the deceas ed or to his 
dependents as a result of some contract or act whic h the deceased 
performed in his life time cannot be said to be the outcome or result 
of the death of the deceased even though these amou nts may go 
into the hands of the dependents only after his death.  
13.  As far as any amount paid under any insurance policy is 
concerned whatever is added to the estate of the de ceased or his 
dependents is not because of the death of the decea sed but because 
of the contract entered into between the deceased a nd the insurance 
company from where he took out the policy. The dece ased paid 
premium on such life insurance and this amount woul d have 
accrued to the estate of the deceased either on mat urity of the 
policy or on his death, whatever be the manner of h is death. These

MACA  Nos.613 & 524 of 2019         Page 8 of 9 
 
amounts are paid because the deceased has wisely in vested his 
savings. Similar would be the position in case of o ther investments 
like bank deposits, share, debentures etc.. The tor t −feasor cannot 
take advantage of the foresight and wise financial investments 
made by the deceased. 
14.  As far as the amounts of pension and gratuity are concerned, 
these are paid on account of the service rendered by the deceased to 
his employer. It is now an established principle of  service 
jurisprudence that pension and gratuity are the pro perty of the 
deceased. They are more in the nature of deferred w ages. The 
deceased employee works throughout his life expecti ng that on his 
retirement he will get substantial amount as pensio n and gratuity. 
These amounts are also payable on death, whatever b e the cause of 
death. Therefore, applying the same principles, the  said amount 
cannot be deducted. 
15.  As held by the House of Lords in Perry v. Cleaver, 1969 
A.C.J. 363  the insurance amount is the fruit of premium paid in the 
past, pension is the fruit of services already rend ered and the wrong 
doer should not be given benefit of the same by ded ucting it from 
the damages assessed.  
16.  Deduction can be ordered only where the tort−f easor satisfies 
the court that the amount has accrued to the claima nts only on 
account of death of the deceased in a motor vehicle accident.”
 
  8.  From the principles expounded in the above st ated cases, neither 
party does have any merit in their contentions. It is to be reiterated here 
that the amount of Rs.20,00,000/- received by the c laimants towards 
Group Personal Accident Policy being meant for any accidental death

MACA  Nos.613 & 524 of 2019         Page 9 of 9 
 
of the employee for which the employee did not pay the premium, the 
tribunal is right in his approach to deduct the sam e from loss of 
dependency. As such, this court does not find any m erit in favour of 
either party to interfere with the impugned award a nd both the appeals 
are dismissed accordingly. 
  9.  The Appellant in MACA No.613 of 2019, i.e. Ne w India 
Assurance Company Ltd. is directed to deposit the entire compensation 
amount along with interest as per the direction of the tribunal within a 
period of two months from today, which shall be dis bursed to the 
claimants on same terms and proportion contained in  the impugned 
judgment. 
  10.  On deposit of the award amount before the le arned Tribunal and 
filing of a receipt evidencing the deposit with ref und applications 
before this Court, the statutory deposit made by the insurance company 
(Appellant in MACA No.613 of 2019) before this Cour t with accrued 
interest thereon shall be refunded to the Insurance Company. 
   
                   (B.P. Routray)  
                                                                                       Judge  
   
C.R.Biswal, Secy.