Page 1 of 22 
 
 
ORISSA HIGH COURT : C U T T A C K 
 W.P.(C) NO.10000 OF 2019 
     With 
 W.P.(C) NO. 17987 OF 2022 
 
In the matter of applications under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India. 
 
 
In W.P.(C) NO.10000 OF 2019 
 
Pravat Kumar Pradhan :  Petitioner 
 
 -Versus- 
 
Govt. of Odisha and others :  Opp. Parties 
 
 
In W.P.(C) NO.17987 OF 2022 
 
Pravat Kumar Pradhan :  Petitioner 
 
 -Versus- 
 
Govt. of Odisha and others :  Opp. Parties 
 
 For Petitioner : M/s. K.P. Mishra, Sr. Advocate,   
   D.Ray, B.S. Pattajoshi,  
   T.K. Pattajoshi and S.Rath, Advocates  
 
 For O.Ps. : Mr. Sonak Mishra,  
   Addl. Standing Counsel 
 
  : None for O.P.3 in W.P.(C) No. 17987/
 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
              
       J U D G M E N T  
 
 
CORAM : 
JUSTICE BISWANATH  RATH     
 
 Date of hearing : 09.05.2023  ::  Date of Judgment : 21.06.2023 
 
 1.   W.P.(C) NO.10000 of 2019 involves the following prayer:- 
A F R

// 2 // 
 
Page 2 of 22 
 
  “It is therefore, prayed that your Lordships may graciously 
be pleased to admit this writ application and to issue Ru le 
NISI calling upon the opposite parties to show cause as to 
why the impugned orders under Annexure-1 and 2d being 
illegal and arbitrary shall not be quashed and if the said opp. 
Parties fail to show cause or show insufficient cause, make 
the said rule absolute. 
  And further the operation of the impugned order under 
Annexure-1 and 2 be stayed till the disposal of the writ 
application. 
  And pass any other orders/directions as this Hon’ble Court 
deems just, fit and proper. 
  And for this act of kindness, the petitioner as in duty bound 
shall ever pray.” 
 
 2. W.P.(C) No.17987 of 2022 involves the following prayer:- 
  “Under the aforesaid facts and circumstances, it is 
therefore, prayed that this Hon’ble Court may graciously be 
pleased to: 
(i) direct/order the Opp. Party No. 1 State Government to 
pass necessary Order in exercise of their power Under Rule 
13(12)(a) of Notaries Rules on the basis of a fresh enquiry, 
being conducted by the Opp. Party No. 2, Competent 
Authority in accordance with the procedure established by 
law, within a stipulated period as may be prescribed by thi s 
Hon’ble Court for the interest of justice; 
(ii) direct/order the Opp. Party No. 1 State Governments to 
dispose of the representation of the Petitioner as at Annexure-
4 in accordance with law; 
(iii) pass such other order(s) or issue direction(s) as may be 
deemed fit and proper in the bona fide interest of justice; 
And for this act of kindness, the petitioner as in duty bou nd 
shall ever pray.” 
 
3. What appears here is W.P.(C) No. 10000/2019 is filed by the 
Petitioner being aggrieved by the orders of the Competent Authority, vide 
Annexure-1 and 2. Annexure-1 being the Notification of th e Law 
Department dated 15.05.2019 cancelling the Certificate of Practice

// 3 // 
 
Page 3 of 22 
 
perpetually debarring Shri Pravat Kumar Pradhan, Notary, Kendrapara, 
the Petitioner having Registration No.ON-67/2009 from practicing as a 
Notary, w.e.f. the date of issue of the Notification. Annexure-2, the 
further Notification issued by the Government pursuant to the decision, 
vide Annexure-1 in exercise of power under Section 10(d) of the Notaries 
Act, 1952 read with Rule 13(13) of the Notaries Rule, 1956 remov ing the 
name of the present Petitioner from the Register maintained under 
Section 4 of the Notaries Act for finding him guilty of pro fessional 
misconduct and in the opinion of the Government, such act ren ders him 
unfit to practice as a Notary.  
4. Subsequently, but  during pendency of W.P.(C) No. 10000/2019, 
the Writ Petition bearing W.P.(C) No. 17987/2022 appears to be fil ed, as 
indicated hereinabove making a simple request for considering t he 
representation of the Petitioner at Annexure-4 herein, as a matter o f 
review of the orders at Annexure-1 and 2 in W.P.(C) No. 10000/2019 . 
This Court here observes, the outcome in W.P.(C) No. 17987/2022 
remains dependent on the ultimate outcome in W.P.(C) No. 10000/20 19. 
Thus this Court proceeds to decide the dispute involving W.P. (C) 
No.10000/2019.  
5. Facts involving the case as briefed and submitted in course o f 
hearing in W.P.(C) No. 10000/2019, the Petitioner, who is an ad vocate,

// 4 // 
 
Page 4 of 22 
 
was appointed also as a Notary in the district of Kendrapa ra having 
Registration No. ON/67 of 2009. While continuing as such the Petitioner 
received a notice from the Competent Authority dependent on the 
complaint submitted by one Sonia Behera, D/o- Rabindra Swain, 
Vill/PO-Harirajpur, P.S.-Banki, Dist-Cuttack. There has been decision for 
conducting an enquiry under Rule 13(1) of the Notaries Rules, 1 956. The 
Petitioner, vide communicated dated 28.11.2018 issued by the Competent 
Authority, was directed to file show cause on the allegation s made in the 
complaint. Notice to show case dated 05.12.2018 is filed h erein as 
Annexure-3. Annexure-4 claims to be the complain against th e Petitioner 
dtd.16.11.2018 involved therein. It is pursuant to the af oresaid asking of 
the Competent Authority, the Petitioner submitted his respon se to the 
show cause notice vide Annexure-5 completely denying the alleg ation 
therein. The Petitioner further pleaded, after receipt of the response, the 
Petitioner was requested by the Law Department in their letter dated 
01.03.2019 to appear before the Competent Authority-cum-Principa l 
Secretary to Government on the date and time fixed therein particularly 
on 23.03.2019 at 4 P.M. either in person or through the legal professional 
for making his submission as finds place at Annexure-6. It i s averred, the 
date of hearing appearing in the communication dated 25.03.201 9 was 
postponed to 20.04.2019, on which date both the complaina nts and the

// 5 // 
 
Page 5 of 22 
 
Petitioner herein were present with their respective lawyers. However, 
neither the complainant nor his witness was examined or cross-examined. 
Similarly, neither the Petitioner nor any witness from the side of th e 
Petitioner nor any document from his side, it is even complai ned that the 
Petitioner claimed to be examined himself and bring some documents,  
however, the Competent Authority refused on the understanding  that 
there is no prima facie evidence against the Notary to proceed with 
further inquiry. Communication for postponement of the matter to 
20.04.2019 is filed as Annexure-7. The Petitioner by way of his response 
contended, documents involving the inquiry were duly executed on 
10.09.2018 and 11.09.2018 in presence of their advocate one  Shri 
Ramakanta Kanungo and the Petitioner simply attested the document as a 
Notary under Section 8(1)(a) of the Notaries Act, 1952. The Petitione r 
thus claimed, he has not committed any illegality in the exec ution of the 
document on the other hand the documents were prepared with the power 
of jurisdiction under the Notaries Act. The Petitioner disputed for having 
issued with any Notarial Certificate pursuant to such docu ment. The 
Petitioner also enclosed both the documents as Annexure-8 and 9. 
 In the above background of the matter and further taking this Cour t 
to the provision at Section 8(1)(a) of the Notaries Act, 1952 read ing 
together with the instruments at Annexures-7 & 8 to the Writ Petition Mr.

// 6 // 
 
Page 6 of 22 
 
K.P. Mishra, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the 
Petitioner attempted to contend that the Notary had the authorit y to attest 
and authenticate the instruments and for there is clear provision at Section 
8(1)(a), Mr. K.P. Mishra, learned Senior Advocate taking this Court to 
the inquiry report vide Annexure-A/2 and the communicatio n at 
Annexures-1 & 2 contended that the competent authority entering into the 
questions relating to the validity of instruments remains co ntrary to the 
power conferred under the provisions of the Notaries Act, 1952. Mr. K.P. 
Mishra, learned Senior Advocate further also contended that the 
communications at Annexures-1 & 2 are without jurisdiction. 
6. To the contrary, based on the notice there has been filing of counter 
affidavit on behalf of Opposite Party Nos.2 & 3 thereby strictl y 
contesting the claim of the Petitioner. Mr. Sonak Mishra, learned  ASC 
while not denying the fact that Petitioner herein was continu ing as a 
Notary also contended that there has been neither examination of a ny 
witness nor marking of any documents from either side. Mr. Sonak 
Mishra, learned ASC, however, taking this Court to the counter affi davit 
of Opposite Party Nos.2 & 3 reading together with the observations in the 
impugned order contended that the claim of the Petitioner that his attempt 
to examine himself as witness to satisfy the document at his instance has 
been refused to be entertained by the competent authority on the premises

// 7 // 
 
Page 7 of 22 
 
that there is no prima facie evidence against the Notary to ca use an 
inquiry, are all false. Mr. Sonak Mishra, learned ASC, on the other hand, 
contended that there never involved any such request eith er orally or by 
way of written at any stage of inquiry. Mr. Sonak Mishra, learned ASC 
further contended that there has been threadbare consideration of th e 
submissions and response involved therein along with docum ents from 
the side of the Petitioner and accordingly there has been justi fied opinion 
formed by the competent authority in cancelling the notary regist ration of 
the Petitioner. It is on the premises that both the documents w ere attested 
Mr. Sonak Mishra, learned ASC contended that the Notary becomes 
automatically a party to such illegal activities and such act ion amounts to 
guilty for performing such misconduct. Mr. Sonak Mishra, learned ASC,  
therefore, attempted to justify the inquiry report vide Annexure- A/B. On 
the allegation of non-compliance of natural justice Mr. Sonak Mish ra, 
learned ASC contended that proposition mooted by the Petition er herein 
are all related to disciplinary proceeding and no way attracted to the 
nature of inquiry involved herein. In the process Mr. Sonak Mish ra, 
learned ASC attempted to justify the communication vide Annexure-1  & 
2 remaining in full attendance of Rule 13(12)(b)(i) and further the 
communication at Annexure-2 was in strict terms of the provision at Rule 
13(13) of the Notaries Rule, 1956. Mr. Sonak Mishra, learned ASC

// 8 // 
 
Page 8 of 22 
 
further contended that for the dispute between the parties centerin g on 
attestation of two instruments and for the admitted posit ion that the 
Notary has attested such documents, there was necessity of co nducting 
the inquiry and for the admitted materials there was no other vi ew 
possible than the report vide Annexure-A/2. 
 It is, in the above background of the matter, Mr. Sonak Mishra, 
learned ASC reading through the other grounds taken by the comp etent 
authority through their counter affidavit, attempted to substa ntiate the 
impugned orders and thus requested for dismissal of the Wri t Petition for 
there is no scope for interfering in the impugned orders. 
7. This Court here finds filing the complaint as appears at Annexure-4  
also copy available herein, Paragraph-3 of which appears to be factu al 
disclosure and Paragraph-3(a) & (b) appear the following complaint:- 
“3. Particulars of Complaint in Paragraphs consecutively 
numbered. 
a) That the complaint was married to Malaya Ranjan Behera on 
17.04.2010 out of the wed lock one girl child named Subhalax mi 
Behera was born on dated 17.02.2011. She then the husband of the 
complainant has been torturing the complainant for giving  birth to 
a girl child and for demand of dowry through took 90(Ninety) 
thousands in cash. The tortures were mentally, physically and 
fiscally by demanding more and more money and still demanding 
30(Thirty) thousand. On 11.09.2018 Notary Pravat Kumar 
Pradhan and Advocate Ramakanta Kanungo with prior conspiracy 
with complainant’s husba nd have notarized 2(Two) deeds under 
coercion and pressure threatening life and liberty of the 
complainant which have crossed all the limits.

// 9 // 
 
Page 9 of 22 
 
b) That on 12.10.2018 when the complainant received the Xerox  
copy of 2(Two) deeds then only she knew from learned persons at 
her parent’s residence that one deed is for dissolution of Marriage 
with legally wedded husband, of the complainant. Malaya Ranjan 
Behera mentioning no claim of the complainant for permanent 
alimony and another deed for declaration of marriage of 
complainant with a person named Prafulla Nayak who is a villager 
and friend of complainant’s husband. Both deeds were made on 
dated 11.09.2008 by cheating the complaint.” 
 
 At the end of the complaint, the complainant also attempted  
showing readiness with witnesses at least one witness namely  Sukanti 
Swain and also intending to enclose about four documents. Annex ure-1 
and 2 being dissolution of marriage and declaration of marriage 
respectively. In his response to the complaint, the Petitioner submitted his 
response to the subsequent allegation at Paragraph-3(a) & 3(b) as    
follows :-  
“8.  That, the averment in Para- 3(a) “the tortures were 
mentally, physically and financially by demanding more and mo re 
money and still demanding Rs. 30,000/- (Thirty Thous and)” is not 
within the knowledge of this respondent, complainant has not 
disclosed before the respondent when she was asked about 
execution of document hence the same is denied by the 
respondent. 
9.  That, in Para- 3(a)“ on 11.09.2018 Notary Pravat Kumar 
Pradhan and Advocate Ramakanta Kanungo with prior conspiracy 
with complainant’s husband have notarised 2 (two) deeds un der 
coercion and pressure threatening life and liberty of the 
complainant which have crossed all the limits” all are false, 
frivolous, baseless, concocted and imaginary story and denied by  
the respondent. 
10. That, the averments of Para-3(b) is also false, frivolous 
and concocted story only to harass the respondent it is false to 
allege, “that on 12.10.2018 when the complainant received the

// 10 // 
 
Page 10 of 22 
 
Xerox copy of 2 (two) deeds then only she knew from learned 
persons of her parent’s residence that one deed is for dissolution of 
marriage with legally wedded husband of the complainant Malay 
Ranjan Behera mentioning no claim of complainant for permanent 
alimony and another deed for declaration of marriage of 
complainant with a person named Prafulla Nayak who is a villager 
and friend of complainant’s husband, both deeds were made on 
dated 11.09.2009” is also denied by the respondent. Moreover it i s 
conspiracy of the complainant to trap the respondent stating both 
deeds were made on 11.09.2008 whereas actually one deed 
(Agreement for dissolution of marriage) was made on 10.09.2018 
and another deed (Agreement for declaration of marriage) was 
made on 11.09.2018. 
11. That, in Para-3(b) it is false to say that both deeds were 
made on dated 11.09.2008 by cheating the complainant. The s ame 
is also denied by the respondent. During the period 11.09.2008 the 
respondent was not appointed as a Notary Public.”  
  
At Paragraph-14, the Petitioner made the following specific response:- 
“14.  that, the true fact is that on 10.09.2018 the complainant  
Sonia Behera, her legally wedded husband Malay Ranjan Behera 
along with the Advocate Ramakanta Kanungo came to the 
respondent with a D.T.P. copy of document requested this 
respondent to attest the said document.” 
 
The Petitioner has also the specific response through Paragraph-20 & 21:- 
“20. That, the next day i.e. on dated 11.09.2018 the complainant 
came to the respondent along with another person by name 
Prafulla Nayak and the Advocate Ramakanta Kanungo with a deed 
of declaration of marriage made by D.T.P. before and requested 
the respondent to notarise the same at the presence of witnesses 
and the respondent did accordingly. 
21. That, on dated 10.09.2018 after execution of said document , 
the complainant taken the document and handed over the xerox  
copy of the same. The respondent while tallying with the 
document with his register ascertained that in the said docum ent 
11.09.2018 is typographical error and advised the concerned 
Advocate to rectify the said typographical error. Said Advocate

// 11 // 
 
Page 11 of 22 
 
corrected the said date putting his initial signature on original deed 
and handed over Xerox copy of the said document. Xerox copy of  
the said document with this respondent and in original  document 
said mistake is rectified. The complainant might have obtained the 
Xerox copy of the document before the date is corrected. The 
respondent is properly executed his work.” 
 
8. From the Competent Authority’ s Note Sheet dated 21.01.2019 as 
produced in original by the learned Additional Standing Cou nsel, this 
Court finds, this proceeding recorded the written statement of th e 
Petitioner being furnished by the Petitioner, placed at P.92/C and 
recording therein the denial of the allegation of the complainan t in detail 
and the Office Note is put up for decision on inquiry. File was  placed on 
22.01.2019 for appropriate order then on 23.02.2019 again t he file was 
placed for appropriate order, there was decision on 21.01.2019 to go 
ahead with inquiry as approved by the Hon’ble Minister of Law. The 
Note Sheet dated 27.02.2019 discloses fixing the proceedin g to 
23.03.2019 at 4 P.M. On 23.03.2019 in the proceeding Record, it appears, 
both parties were present. The respondent, present Petitioner prayed fo r 
adjournment and the time Petition was allowed consequent ly the matter 
was adjourned to 20.04.2019. Plea on behalf of the competent aut hority 
that for the admission to the fact of attestation of two in struments 
involved itself is a ground of misconduct by the Notary, thi s Court 
observes, for the rule 8(1)(a) taken note hereinabove in paragraph no.15 it 
becomes clear that the Notary is well within its authority to  authenticate

// 12 // 
 
Page 12 of 22 
 
and or attest execution of any document, for the documents inv olved 
being attested or authenticated by such Notary, if valid or invalid, remains 
with the authorities other than the authorities under the No taries Act, 
1952.  
9. The proceeding dated 20.04.2019 reads as follows:- 
 “Both parties are present  through their respective Counsel and 
file haziras. 
 The petitioner files copy of certain Rules, Acts, Notifications 
and judgments after serving copy thereof on the other side. Copy 
of the written statement field by the respondent is also served 
upon learned Counsel appearing for the complainant in our 
presence. 
 Heard in full. Put up to be prepared subsequently.”  
 
10. The above recording has a clear disclosure that the proceeding w as 
concluded on that date and this proceeding nowhere discloses  that there 
has been any attempt for evidence or bringing in any document  to be 
marked in the proceeding by the complainant and here Flag A in the said 
file. Report leading to bring in Annexures-1 & 2 reads as follows:- 
“The instant complaint has been filed by the complainant with prayer 
to take appropriate action against the respondent Notary for atte sting 
two deeds, both dated 11.9.2018 one for acknowledgement of 
dissolution of marriage and the other for acknowledgement of 
declaration of marriage. 
 Notice of the complaint being issued, the respondent-Notary 
has appeared and filed a detailed show cause denying the 
allegations. 
 Both parties being represented by their respective lawyers, 
were heard at length on 20.4.2019 in course of which, they     
reiterated their respective points of view on the dispute. 
 
Complainant’s case:

// 13 // 
 
Page 13 of 22 
 
 It is alleged that the complainant had married one Malaya 
Ranjan Behera on 17.04.2010 and out of the said wedlock a gill-
child namely, Subhalaxmi Behera was born on 17.02.2011. 
However since then, the husband of the complainant subject ed 
her to serve mental and physical torture and also demanded 
further dowry of Rs.30,000/-. It is further alleged that on 
11.09.2018, the respondent- Notary acting in connivance with  
the complainant’s husband and his Advocate, Ramakanta 
Kanungo, notarised two deeds under coercion and pressure by 
threatening the complainant of danger to her life. On 
12.02.2018, the complainant came to know that while one of the 
said two deeds notarized by the respondent is a purported 
acknowledgement of dissolution of her marriage with Malaya 
Ranjan Behera, the other is a purported declaration/ 
acknowledgement of her marriage with one Prafulla Nayak. 
 It is submitted by learned Counsel for the complainant that 
she was forced to put the signatures even though there was 
neither any intention on her part to dissolve her marriage with 
Malaya Ranjan Behera nor of entering into marriage with the 
said Prafulla Nayak. Both the deeds have been fraudulently 
prepared by taking advantage of the compl ainant’s simplicity 
and ignorance. It is also stated that the so-called deed of 
acknowledgement of dissolution of marriage bears the date 11 th 
September, 2018, whereas the signature of the complainant 
appearing on the first page of the said deed mentions the date as 
10.09.2018. Both the Notary and the Advocate identifying th e 
parties have endorsed the date as 10.09.2018. This, according to 
learned Counsel for the complainant, proves the fraud 
committed by the Notary-Public. Learned Counsel for the 
complainant, by referring to the notifications issued by the 
Government in Law Department, further submits that it is not 
permissible on the part of a Notary-Public to either attest any 
document purporting to dissolve any marriage or to register one. 
On being asked as to if the complainant has approached any 
authority against her husband and the Advocate, Ramakant 
Kanungo as also the said Prafulla Nayak, it is submitted by 
learned Counsel that she could not do so for fear of danger to  
her life. However, it is submitted that a complaint has since 
been lodged against the said Advocate before the State Bar 
Council, (DP No.26/2018). Be it noted that no material has been 
placed to substantiate the above claim.

// 14 // 
 
Page 14 of 22 
 
Respondent’s reply:- 
 The attestation of the two deeds in question by the 
respondent Notary are admitted by him in his show cause reply 
but it is contended that the complainant and her husband had 
approached him on their own volition and free will and that 
there was no question of his subjecting the complainant to an y 
kind of coercion or pressure as alleged. It is submitted by 
learned counsel for the respondent that as required by law, the  
particulars of the executants of the two deeds were duly noted in 
the notarial register and their signatures were also obtained 
thereon. He further submits that the deeds in question are 
neither deeds of dissolution of marriage nor of registration of 
marriage. Accordingly to him, there is no bar in law for a 
Notary to attest/ notarize documents acknowledging dissoluti on 
or declaration of marriage. As regards the apparent discrepancy 
in date as pointed out by counsel for the complainant, it is  
submitted that the same is actually a typographical error wh ich 
has since been rectified and corrected copies thereof are 
enclosed to the written statement filed in this case. Learned 
Counsel for the respondent further submits that law permits a 
Notary to attest a document acknowledging prior marriage as 
well as prior dissolution of the marriage and hence, he has 
committed no illegality by executing the deeds in question. 
Finding:- 
 From the above narration of the facts, it is manifest that the 
attestation of two deeds in question by the respondent Notary  is 
admitted. Without entering into the controversy as to whet her 
the complainant was coerced and pressurized by her husband 
Malaya Ranjan Behera along with the respondent Notary and 
Advocate, Ramakanta Kanungo to execute the two deeds, it 
would be proper to first examine as to whether law permits 
attestation of the deeds in question by a Notary. 
 A reference to section 8 of the Notaries Act, 1952, which 
deals with functions of Notaries reveals that a Notary by virt ue 
of his office is, inter alia, empowered to “verify, authenticate, 
certify or attest the execution of any instrument.” In the instan t 
case, the respondent Notary has attested a deed styled as “Deed 
of agreement/ declaration, acknowledgement of cancellation/ 
dissolution of marriage.” A reading of the recitals of the above 
deed shows that the parties voluntarily agreed in presence o f 
local gentleman and family members to dissolve their marriage.

// 15 // 
 
Page 15 of 22 
 
It is also provided in the said deed that both parties being free 
from bondage of their marriage by virtue of the said 
dissolution/cancellation, are at liberty to marry as per their 
sweet will. 
 On a plain reading of the recitals of the deed as above, it is  
manifest that the same is intended to be an instrument of 
dissolution of marriage inasmuch as there is no legal document 
or other valid proof of dissolution of marriage basing upon 
which the so-called deed of acknowledgement of dissolution of 
marriage was made save and except the purported self-
declaration of the parties intention to dissolve their marriage. I t 
is not disputed that both parties are Hindus and hence, governed 
by the personal law relating to Hindus. The validity of the  
marriage of the complainant with Malaya Ranjan Behera on 
17.04.10 is also not disputed. It is trite law that a vali d Hindu 
marriage can only be dissolved in accordance with law by a 
decree of divorce granted by a competent Court of law. In other 
words, it is not open to the parties, to a marriage to volunta rily 
walk out of the material relationship on their own sweet will 
without having sanction of law. Therefore, what the so-called  
deed of agreement/declaration, acknowledgement of 
cancellation/dissolution of marriage amounts to, is nothing but 
recognizing/acknowledging the voluntary severance of material 
relationship between the concerned parties. As already stated, 
such dissolution, if at all, cannot be said to have taken pl ace as 
per procedure established by law and hence, can have no legal 
sanctity whatsoever. Such being the legal position, the deed i n 
question seeking to acknowledge an invalid act is therefore, 
rendered an illegal instrument. The respondent Notary being 
basically an Advocate himself is expected to be aware of the 
legal position as indicated above. However, in the instant cas e, 
not only has the respondent Notary attested the legally invali d 
deed of acknowledgement of dissolution of marriage but also 
has gone on to attest another deed, the effect of which is to 
acknowledge the complainant’s so -called marriage with a 
person other than her legally wedded husband. Obviously, her 
earlier marriage with Malaya Ranjan Behera not having been 
dissolved in accordance with law, must be held to be subsisti ng 
at the time when the second deed i.e., declaration of her 
marriage with Prafulla Nayak was executed. As such, the said 
deed also has no force of law.

// 16 // 
 
Page 16 of 22 
 
 Be that as it may, the Government in Law Department vide 
Notification No.3921 dtd. 18.3.2009 has observed that issu ance 
of “marriage certificate” by adopting self -innovated format for 
issue of “Authenticate certificate of marriage” cannot be treated 
as a notarial act covered under section 8(1) of the Notaries Act. 
 Thus, from the factual and legal position emanating from 
the above discussion, it becomes crystal clear that by lendin g 
his seal and signature to attest an invalid document, the result of 
which is to grant approval to an illegal act, the responden t 
Notary has committed gross misconduct within the meaning of 
the Notaries Act and Rules framed thereunder. Similarly, by 
attesting the so-called declaration/ acknowledgement of 
marriage of the complainant with another person on the same 
date and at the same time despite the fact that her marriage with 
Malaya Ranjan Behera was/is legally subsisting, also amounts 
to gross misconduct. At the cost of repetition, it is stated that the 
respondent Notary being an Advocate himself cannot take the 
plea that the parties had approached him on their own volit ion 
and free will and that they had willingly executed the deeds in  
question. Such a plea has no legs to stand in view of the 
discussions made herein before. 
 For the foregoing reasons, I am of the considered opinion 
that the respondent Notary has committed gross professional 
misconduct in attesting the deeds in question and thereby , he 
has himself become a party to the illegal acts said to have been 
committed/contemplated thereunder. 
 Having held as above, it is to be examined as to what acti on 
could be taken against the respondent for the same. A reference 
to section 10(d) of the Notaries Act, 1952 reveals that the 
appropriate Government may remove the name of the Notary 
from the register maintained by it under section 4 if he has b een 
found, upon inquiry in the prescribed manner, to be guilty of 
such professional or other misconduct as in the opinion of t he 
Government, renders him unfit to practice as a Notary. Having 
regard to my finding as above that by attesting the deeds in 
question the respondent Notary has committed gross 
professional misconduct coupled with the fact that such act can  
have serious repercussion in the life of a young woman who 
also has a minor child, I am of the considered view that his 
continuance as Notary shall be detrimental to the society at 
large and hence, he should be held to be unfit to practice as a 
Notary anymore. Therefore, ends of justice would be best

// 17 // 
 
Page 17 of 22 
 
served by cancelling his certificate of practice and perpetually 
debarring him from Notarial Practice as provided under Rule-
13-(120- (b)- (i) of the Notaries Rules, 1956. Consequently  the 
name of such Notary should be removed from the register as per 
the provision u/sec-10(d) of Notaries Act, 1952.” 
 
11. Perusal of the observation of the Competent Authority by way of 
Report appears to be a decision has been taken merely on the basi s that 
attestation of two deeds has been admitted and then taking aid  of the 
provision at Section 8 of the Notaries Act, 1952, the Competent Authority 
had come to observe the Notary had acted contrary to the Notifi cation 
issued by the Government of Odisha in Law Department dated 
18.03.2009 observing issuance of marriage certificate by way of 
authenticated certificate of marriage cannot be treated as a notarial ac t 
under Section 8(1) of the Notaries Act and it is thus held, t he Petitioner 
acted contrary to the provision of the Notaries Act, 1952 and t hus he 
should be taken out from the empanelment resulting passing o f 
Annexure-1 and 2. 
12. This Court here first of all finds, the documents vide Annexu re-8, 
the cancellation document, and Annexure-9, the deed of marriage, were 
undisputedly signed on 10.09.2018 and 11.09.2018 respectivel y. There 
cannot be any dispute to the Notification of the Government dated  
18.03.2009 holding issuance of marriage certificate by adopting self-
innovative format for issue of authenticate certificate of marriage ca nnot

// 18 // 
 
Page 18 of 22 
 
be treated as a notarial act. This Court here undisputedly observes, there 
was no marriage certificate in the format of authenticated marriage 
certificate given by the Notary. It is only attestation of some inst rument. 
There is clear demonstration of certificate of Notary on both the 
documents. In the circumstance, this Court finds, the Law Departmen t 
Notification bearing No. 3921 dated 18.03.2009 has no applicati on to 
case at hand.  
13. For perusal of documents at Annexure-8 and 9 through the  
proceeding file produced before this Court appended as Annexure-1 and 2 
to the complain, both in Xerox copy, this Court called for pr oduction of 
the Record of the Competent Authority involving the proc eeding and 
whole scrutiny, four sets of Record produced by the Competent Authority 
through Mr. Sonak Mishra, learned Additional Standing Counsel b ut 
nowhere finds the original of any such documents, this Co urt thus finds 
strange in the inquiry conducted involving such serious allegation without 
even getting into the original on which the complain invo lved, further 
even on scrutiny of these two documents either for being part of the 
Competent Authority’s Record or enclosed here as Annexure -8 and 9, on 
whole perusal of the documents, again this Court finds, ther e is in fact no 
Notarial Certificate given by the Notary on attestation of s uch 
instruments. It appears, there has been only attestation of bot h the

// 19 // 
 
Page 19 of 22 
 
documents by the Notary. In the circumstance, this Court finds, there has 
been no following up proper procedure. It is at the same time, t his Court 
again finds, there has been no attempt from the side of the comp lainant to 
at least give evidence to satisfy the Competent Authority that even the 
preparation of the document was at the instance of the Notary involved, in 
absence of which this Court finds, there is full flaw in condu cting of 
inquiry by the Competent Authority and thus both the orders  at 
Annexure-1 and 2 found to be mechanical and in absence of app lication 
of lawful mind, consequently not sustainable in the eye of law. 
14. Now coming to consider the effect of Section 8 (1) (a) of the 
Notaries Act, 1952 weighed much in the mind of the Competent  
Authority, this Court finds, Sections 8(1)(a) and 8(2) of the Notaries Act, 
1952 read as follows:- 
“8. Functions of notaries- (1) A notary may do all or any of 
the following acts by virtue of his office, namely:- 
(a) Verify, authenticate, certify or attest the execution of any 
instrument; 
8(2) No act specified in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to 
be a notarial act except when it is done by a notary under his 
signature and official seal.” 
 
Reading the provision at Sub-Section (a) of Section 8(1) of the  
Notaries Act, there is no doubt that a Notary can verify, authentica te, 
certify or and attest the execution of any instrument. In the circu mstance, 
this Court finds, attestation of the Notary on the instr ument involved

// 20 // 
 
Page 20 of 22 
 
herein is well within the domain of Section 8(a)(1) of the Notaries Act. In 
the circumstance, there is no doubt that there has been miss-application of 
this provision to the case at hand.  
15. This Court here also takes into account the allegation of no s trict 
compliance of Rule 13(12) of the Notaries Rules invalidat ing the actions 
involved. This Court here finds, Rule 13(12) of the Notaries Rul es reads 
as follows :- 
 “13. Inquiry into the allegations of professional or other 
misconduct of a notary. 
       xxx    xxx    xxx 
(12) (a) The appropriate Government shall consider the report of  
the competent authority, and if in its opinion a further in quiry is 
necessary, may cause such further inquiry to be made and a further 
report submitted by the competent authority.  
(b) If after considering the report of the competent authority, the 
appropriate Government is of the opinion that action should  be 
taken against the notary the appropriate Government may make an 
order-  
(i) cancelling the certificate of practice and perpetually debarring  
the notary from practice; or  
(ii) suspending him from practice for a specified period; or  
(iii) letting him off with a warning, according to the nature and  
gravity of the misconduct of the notary proved. 
 Reading the above, this Court finds, the Rule contemplates two  
reports but only in case the appropriate Government considers for further 
enquiry to obtain a second report from the Competent Authority fo r its 
ultimate satisfaction, which is not the case of the Petitioner h erein. This 
Court thus rejects the above contention of the Petitioner.

// 21 // 
 
Page 21 of 22 
 
16. This Court here takes into account a decision of the Madras Hig h 
Court in the matter of a Pleader ( AIR 1945 MADRAS 55), where a 
Special Bench of Madras High Court held that mere negligence does not 
amount to professional misconduct and such decision appl ies to the case 
at hand. 
17. This Court un-hesitantly holds, the impugned order at Annexure-1 
and 2 remain unsustainable in the eye of law and thus sets aside the both. 
18.  It is profitable to mention here that for there is no 
invalidation of the instruments, vide Annexure-8 & 9 by any competent 
court of law, there was no occasion for entering such complain m erely 
because of the Notary has just attested the instruments. Furth er the 
notification dtd.18.3.2009 comes to play only when there is iss uing of 
marriage certificate by the Notary. This Court here finds, the Compet ent 
Authority lost sight of above while undertaking the required exercise and 
the impugned orders are in clear non-application of mind.  
19.  This Court while setting aside both orders/notifications at 
Annexure-1 & 2 issues a Writ of Mandamus against the Competent 
Authority restoring the position of the Petitioner, as a N otary forthwith. 
This order is, however, provided the period for grant of l icence is not 
expired in the meantime. In the event the licence period has expired, there 
may not be any obstruction in the renewal of licence of t he Petitioner for

// 22 // 
 
Page 22 of 22 
 
it was revoked illegally. This Court also clarifies here that  the judgment 
of this Court shall not stand on the way of the Complainant, Sonia 
Behera-O.P.3 herein for her pursuing other remedies available through  
any other statutory forum or legal forum and the documents invol ved 
herein, vide Annexure-8 and 9 shall be considered in such f orum in its 
appropriate spirit. 
20.  W.P.(C) No. 10000 of 2019 thus succeeds. No order as to 
cost. 
 21. As a consequence of this judgment in setting aside the 
impugned orders at Annexure-1 and 2 herein, there is no further or der 
necessary for involvement of the Petitioner ’s representation in W.P.(C) 
No. 17987 of 2022, which is also disposed of accordingly.  
  
                                
      (Biswanath Rath) 
                   Judge                   
        
 
 
 
Orissa High Court, Cuttack. 
The 21st June, 2023/M.K.Rout, A.R.-cum-Sr.Secy.