W.P.(C) No.14714 of 2012                                              Page 1 of 12 
 
 
               IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK 
 
W.P.(C) No.14714 of 2012 
 
In the matter of an application under Article 226 &  227 of the 
Constitution of India.                 
------------------  
    
Rabi Narayan Nanda 
 
….              Petitioner  
-versus- 
 
Utkal Gramya Bank & Another ….     Opposite Parties  
 
 
 
 
For Petitioner :        Mr. A. Mishra, Adv 
ocate 
  
 
For Opposite Parties :        Mr. P.V. Balakrishna, 
Advocate  
 
                 
  CORAM: 
                        JUSTICE V. NARASINGH 
                            
  
 
 
  DATE OF HEARING    : 03.07.2023 
 
 
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 03.07.2023  
 
   
V. Narasingh, J.  
 
 1. Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and le arned 
counsel for the Opposite Parties. 
 2. The petitioner while working as Branch Manager of 
Utkal Gramya Bank, Boudh Branch instituted an FIR a gainst 
one Ajay Kumar Praharaj Clerk-cum-Cashier for defal cation to

W.P.(C) No.14714 of 2012                                              Page 2 of 12  
  
the tune of Rs.25,40,586/-(Rupees twenty five lakhs  forty 
thousand five hundred eight six only) and soon ther eafter the 
petitioner was placed under suspension for dereliction of duty in 
connection with misappropriation of the Bank money by Mr. 
Ajay Kumar Praharaj Clerk-cum-Cashier and also on account of 
other irregularities, such as AGL. Gold loan accoun ts, other 
loans and advances and after enquiry show cause was  issued 
seeking an explanation regarding proposed punishmen t and on 
receipt of the same, the following punishment was imposed vide 
Annexure-16. 
                              xxx     xxx    xxx  
  2. After careful consideration of your 
above representation/ submission, as 
well as your submission, in the personal 
hearing on dt.27.08.2011, it has been 
decided by the undersigned in terms of 
Regulation No.39 (I) of Utkal Gramya 
Bank (Officers & Employees) Service 
Regulations, 2010 to impose penalty of 
“Reduction of basic pay to Rs/-16,900/- 
for a period of one year with cumulative 
effect, (ii) The period of suspension will 
be treated as such i.e. not spent on duty 
and you will not earn any increment for 
the said period, (iii) Bank reserves the 
right to proceed further in the case 
based upon the outcome of the 
police/court case."  
             xxx        xxx        xxx 
 3. In terms of regulations of the Bank, the petiti oner 
preferred an appeal against the punishment so award ed and the 
same was disposed of by order dated 04.04.2012 at A nnexure-
18.

W.P.(C) No.14714 of 2012                                              Page 3 of 12  
 
 4. Assailing the order of punishment dated 16.08.2 011 
and the order of Appellate Authority dated 04.04.20 12 at 
Annexure-16 & 18 respectively, the present Writ Pet ition has 
been filed. 
 4-(A). It is apt to note here that inadvertently A nnexure-15, 
show cause against proposed punishment has been ass ailed 
instead of Annexure-16, the order of punishment. 
 5. It is borne out from the affidavit filed by the  Opposite 
Party-Bank that during the pendency of the Writ Pet ition, the 
Opposite Party-Bank instituted a Civil Suit in the Court of Civil 
Judge (Senior Division), Boudh numbered as Civil Su it 
No.82/2009 in which one Ajay Kumar Praharaj who was  the 
Cashier-cum-Clerk was arrayed as defendant and the alleged 
pecuniary loss which was also ascribed to the prese nt petitioner 
i.e Rs.25,40,586/-(Rupees twenty five lakhs forty t housand five 
hundred eight six only) was the subject matter of t he said suit 
and the issues framed therein are extracted hereund er for 
convenience of ready reference. 
  4. xxx xxx xxx 
  1. Whether the suit is maintainable? 
  2. Whether the plaintiff has any cause of action 
to bring the suit against the defendant? 
  3. Whether the suit is barred by law of 
limitation? 
  4. Whether the defendant Ajaya Kumar Praharaj 
received case of Rs.25,33,125 on 7.1.2008 after 
signing in the vault register of the bank for 
transactions in the cash counter? 
  5. Whether the defendant received cash of 
Rs.5.41,430/- from different customers in the 
cash counter?

W.P.(C) No.14714 of 2012                                              Page 4 of 12  
  
  6. Whether the defendant received Rs.7400/- 
from the customers and he did not show the 
same in the receipt cum payment register? 
  7. Whether the defendant is liable to pay 
Rs.25,40586/- with Interest @ 18% P.A. to the 
bank?   
  8. Whether the properties of the defendant as per  
the schedule F is liable to be attached towards 
the satisfaction of the decreetal amount? 
  9. What other relief(s), the parties are entitled ? 
                           xxx xxx xxx 
 
 6. After detailed examination of materials on reco rd, the 
learned Trial Court passed a judgment whereby it wa s held that 
the plaintiff Bank is entitled for a decree of Rs.2 5,40,586/-
(Rupees twenty five lakhs forty thousand five hundr ed eight six 
only) along with an interest at the rate of 4% per annum from 
the defendant who is the  Cashier-cum-Clerk and it is the 
categorical finding of the learned Trial Court that  it is the 
defendant, who is responsible for the said loss. 
 7. It is on record that the Bank has filed Executi on Case 
numbered as EP Case No.4/2015 before the learned Ci vil Judge 
(Senior Division), Boudh for execution. 
 8. It is the contention of the learned counsel for  the 
petitioner, Mr. A. Mishra that the impugned order o f 
Disciplinary Authority at Annexure-16 suffers from the vices of 
violation of principle of natural justice inasmuch as documents, 
which have a bearing on the point at issue, were no t provided to 
the petitioner and adequate opportunity to cross-ex amine the 
witnesses was also not afforded. The order is also assailed on 
the count of proportionality.

W.P.(C) No.14714 of 2012                                              Page 5 of 12  
 
 9. Per contra, learned counsel for the Opposite Pa rty-
Bank, Mr. Balakrishna submits that there are no mat erials on 
record to substantiate the allegation of violation of natural 
justice and it is his submission that taking into a ccount that the 
petitioner was working in a financial institution i n the given 
facts the Disciplinary Authority as well as the App ellate 
Authority have taken liberal view and as such keepi ng in view 
the limited jurisdiction of the Courts in the matte r of 
interference in Disciplinary Proceeding, the Writ P etition is 
liable to be rejected and in this context learned c ounsel for the 
Opposite Party-Bank relies on the judgment of the a pex Court 
in the case of Deputy General Manager and Others vs. Ajai 
Kumar Srivastava reported in (2021) 2 SCC 612.  
 10. Assailing the said order of the Disciplinary A uthority, 
the petitioner preferred an appeal and the memorand um of 
appeal is also on record at Annexure-17. The releva nt 
paragraphs of the appeal is quoted hereunder for convenience of 
ready reference. 
  “ A-(1)- xxx xxx xxx 
       (2)- The vital documents on which I intend 
to rely for my defense was not provided to me 
intentionally on the ground that those are not 
relevant to the charges, the details of which was 
conveyed to the Chairman & D.A. vide my letter 
Dt.10.12.2010.a copy of which is enclosed here 
with for your kind reference & perusal. 
                    (3)- xxx xxx xxx 
      (4)- xxx xxx xxx 
      (5)- xxx xxx xxx 
      (6)- xxx xxx xxx 
  B-(1)- xxx xxx xxx

W.P.(C) No.14714 of 2012                                              Page 6 of 12  
  
     (2)- The incident of Misappropriation of 
cash by Sri A.K. Praharaj C.C. was an event of a 
particular day i.e. on dt.07.01.08 as per all 
available records including the F.I.R.. lodged by 
the Bank at Boudh Police Station. Incidentally, 
at no point of time or no where Sri Praharaj had 
ventilated/stated my involvement in any manner 
what so ever in the misappropriation of 
Rs.2540586/-on Dt. 07.01.08. Besides, I have 
also not been charge sheeted for 
misappropriation for the said amount nor any 
involvement in that misappropriation. 
  Thus when Bank has not suffered any 
financial loss, it is an arbitrary decision of the 
D.A to put me in to financial loss by reducing my 
basic to Rs.16900/- which is almost the initial 
basic pay of a scale -1 officer at the verge of my 
service tenure at the bank. 
 C- xxx xxx xxx 
 10.           The Appellate Authority passed the o rder at 
Annexure-18, which is extracted hereunder. 
                           xxx         xxx         xxx 
  BANK'S BOUDH BRANCH 
 
  DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS  
  APPEAL AGAINST THE IMPOSED 
PENALTY  
 Please refer to your appeal dated 18th 
November 2011. 
 2. The Appellate Authority i.e. the Bank's 
Board of Directors thoroughly examined your 
appeal and upheld the penalty imposed on you 
by the Competent Authority and Chairman 
3.4.12 vide Head Office letter No. 
VIGIL/356(A) dt.28.09.2011. 
3. Please return to us immediately the 
duplicate copy of this letter duty signed by you

W.P.(C) No.14714 of 2012                                              Page 7 of 12  
 
with date in token of your having received the 
original. 
                              xxx         xxx          xxx 
 11. Referring to the aforesaid order passed by the  
Appellate Authority, it is submitted by the learned  counsel for 
the petitioner Mr. Mishra that ex-facie, the same s uffers from 
the vice of lack of reasoning and on that account a lone the 
appellate order is liable to be set aside and in th is context he 
relies on the judgment of the apex Court Kranti Associates vs. 
Masood Ahmed Khan  reported in (2010) 9 SCC 496.  
 12. After taking note of all the judgments, the ape x Court 
in the case of Kranti Associates (Supra) reiterated the seminal 
importance of recording of reasons even while takin g an 
administrative decision, if such decision affects a nyone 
prejudicially. Paragraph-47 of the said judgment su mmarizing 
the decision of the Court is extracted hereunder:- 
                     xxx           xxx         xxx 
 47. Summarising the above discussion this Court 
holds; 
                         (a) In India the judicial trend has always been to 
record reasons, even in administrative decisions, 
such decisions affect anyone prejudicially.  
  (b) A quasi-judicial authority must record reason s 
in support of its conclusions.  
  (c) Insistence on recording of reasons is meant t o 
serve the wider principle of justice that justice must 
not only be done it must also appear to be done as 
well. 
  (d) Recording of reasons also operates as a valid  
restraint on any possible arbitrary exercise of 
judicial and quasi-judicial or even administrative 
power.

W.P.(C) No.14714 of 2012                                              Page 8 of 12  
  
  (e) Reasons reassure that discretion has been 
exercised by the decision-maker on relevant 
grounds and by disregarding extraneous 
considerations. 
  (f) Reasons have virtually become as indispensabl e 
a component of a decision-making process as 
observing principles of natural justice by judicial  
quasi-judicial and even by administrative bodies. 
  (g) Reasons facilitate the process of judicial re view 
by superior courts. 
  (h) The ongoing judicial trend in all countries 
committed to rule of law and constitutional 
governance is in favour of reasoned decisions 
based on relevant facts. This is virtually the 
lifeblood of judicial decision-making justifying th e 
principle that reason is the sole of justice.  
  (i) Judicial or even quasi-judicial opinions thes e 
days can be as different as the judges and 
authorities who deliver them. All these decisions 
serve one common purpose which is to demonstrate 
by reason that the relevant factors have been 
objectively considered. This is important for 
sustaining the litigants' faith in the justice deli very 
system.  
  (j) Insistence on reason is a requirement for bot h 
judicial accountability and transparency.  
  (k) If a judge or a quasi-judicial authority is n ot 
candid enough about his/her decision-making 
process then it is impossible to know whether the 
person deciding is faithful to the doctrine of 
precedent or to principles of incrementalism. 
  (l) Reasons in support decisions must be cogent, 
clear and succinct. A pretence of reasons “rubber-
stamp reasons” is not to be equated with a valid 
decision-making process. 
  (m) It cannot be doubted that transparency is the  
sine qua non of restraint on abuse of judicial

W.P.(C) No.14714 of 2012                                              Page 9 of 12  
 
powers. Transparency in decision-making not only 
makes the judges and decision-makers less prone to 
errors but also makes them subject to broader 
scrutiny. (See David Shapiro  in  Defence of Judicial 
Candor) 
  (n) Since the requirement to record reasons 
emanates from the broad doctrine of fairness in 
decision-making, the said requirement is now 
virtually a component of human rights and was 
considered part of Strasbourg Jurisprudence . See  
Ruiz Torija v. Spain EHRR, at 562 para 29 and 
Anya v. University of Oxford, wherein the Court 
referred to Article 6 of the European Convention of  
Human Rights which requires,  
 "adequate and intelligent reasons must be given fo r 
judicial decisions.” 
  (0) In all common law jurisdictions judgments pla y 
a vital role in setting up precedents for the futur e. 
Therefore, for development of law, requirement of 
giving reasons for the decision is of the essence 
and is virtually a part of "due process”. 
                        xxx       xxx      xxx 
 13. In Paragraph-L of the above summary, the apex Court 
has been categorical that the reasons have to be co gent, clear 
and succinct and deprecated “pretence” of recording  such 
reasons or “rubber-stamp reasons” since the same ca nnot 
conform to the norms of a just decision making process. 
 14. Examined on the touch stone of the said judgme nt of 
Kranti Associates (Supra), this Court find force in the 
submission of the learned counsel for the petitione r Mr. Mishra 
that the appellate order is liable to be set aside on the ground of 
lack of reasoning. 
 15. Relating to the quashing of the order passed b y the 
Disciplinary Authority, it is worth noting that the  charges faced

W.P.(C) No.14714 of 2012                                              Page 10  of 12  
  
by the petitioner admittedly not confined only to 
misappropriation of Bank’s money worthy Rs.25,40,58 6/- alone 
and hence the plea for quashing the Disciplinary Proceeding and 
the punishment imposed vide Annexure-16 (wrongly st ated as 
Annexure-15 as noted ) on the ground of violation o f natural 
justice and proportionality is untenable and does n ot merit 
consideration in view of the law laid down by the a pex Court in 
the case of Deputy General Manager (Supra), wherein the 
contours of exercise of power by constitutional Cou rts while 
dealing with Disciplinary Proceeding has been dealt with. 
 16. Paragraph-28 thereof is extracted hereunder fo r 
convenience of ready reference:- 
                               xxx      xxx      xx x 
  “The constitutional court while exercising its 
jurisdiction of judicial review under Article 226 
or Article 136 of the Constitution would not 
interfere with the findings of fact arrived at in 
the departmental enquiry proceedings except in 
a case of mala fides or perversity i.e. where 
there is no evidence to support a finding or 
where a finding is such that no man acting 
reasonably and with objectivity could have 
arrived at those findings and so long as there is 
some evidence to support the conclusion 
arrived at by the departmental authority, the 
same has to be sustained.” 
                           xxx       xxx      xxx 
 17. On close scrutiny of materials on record and k eeping in 
view the law laid down by the apex Court in the cas e of Deputy 
General Manager (Supra) and paragraph-28 thereof, extracted 
hereinabove, this Court is not persuaded to hold th at the order 
of Disciplinary Authority is liable to be quashed.

W.P.(C) No.14714 of 2012                                              Page 11  of 12  
 
 18. On a conspectus of materials on record, this C ourt is of 
the considered view that ends of justice would be s ub served, if 
the matter is relegated to the Appellate Authority,  to pass a 
reasoned order. 
 18-(A).  It shall be open to the petitioner to fil e additional 
memorandum of appeal if so advised to bring on reco rd the 
relevant materials which would enable the Appellate  Authority 
to come to a cogent finding.  
 19. While rehearing the appeal of the petitioner, the 
Appellate Authority shall also take into account th e judgment 
passed by the learned Civil Judge adverted to herei nabove, 
directing for recovery from the defendant Ajay Kuma r Praharaj 
in the light of categorical finding that the financ ial irregularity 
is solely attributed to him in as much as, it is no w on record that 
in the process of the delinquency committed by the said 
Praharaj, the Bank suffered the pecuniary loss. As such, prima 
facie the  petitioner cannot be attributed with any  negligence in 
the matter of causing any pecuniary loss. And, as n oted 
execution case has already been initiated for recov ering the said 
loss. 
 20. This Court has no iota of doubt that the Appel late 
Authority shall apply its mind and give due weighta ge to such 
finding of the Civil Court, pass reasoned order on examination 
of the statement of witnesses and through scrutiny of documents 
by providing personal hearing to the petitioner or his authorized 
representative and also taking into account other c ontentions in 
the memorandum of Appeal and the additional memoran dum of 
Appeal, if petitioner chooses to file the same.

W.P.(C) No.14714 of 2012                                              Page 12  of 12  
  
 21. Since it is stated that the petitioner has ret ired since 
2018, the Appellate Authority shall do well to disp ose of the 
appeal within a period of six months from the date of 
receipt/production of the copy of this order. 
 22. For the reasons recorded above, the order of t he 
Appellate Authority at Annexure-18 is hereby set aside. 
  23. Accordingly, the Writ Petition stands dispose d of. No 
costs.  
   
  
                                                                               (V. Narasingh)          
                                                                                         Judge 
 
 
Orissa High Court, Cuttack, 
Dated the, 3
rd  July, 2023/Ayesha