IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK 
W.P. (C) No. 12484 of 2019  
Applications under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of  
India. 
 ----------------------------- 
 
 Surendra Barik ……   Petitioner 
                                            -versus- 
 State of Odisha & others ……   Opp.Parties 
 
W.P. (C) No. 12485 of 2019  
 
 Sudhakar Barik ……   Petitioner 
                                            -versus- 
 State of Odisha & others ……   Opp.Parties 
 
W.P. (C) No. 12486 of 2019  
 
 Sadananda Pradhan ……   Petitioner 
                                            -versus- 
 State of Odisha & others ……   Opp.Parties 
 
W.P. (C) No. 12487 of 2019  
 
 Aurobinda Behera ……   Petitioner 
                                            -versus- 
 State of Odisha & others ……   Opp.Parties 
 
W.P. (C) No. 12488 of 2019  
 
 Premraj Panda ……   Petitioner 
                                            -versus- 
 State of Odisha & others ……   Opp.Parties

2
For petitioners: Mr. Budhadev Routray  
 (Senior Advocate)  
 
For Opp. parties: Mr. Saswat Das 
 Addl. Govt. Advocate 
        
 
  Mr. Kousik Ananda Guru  
       Advocate  
       (for opp. parties nos.2 to 4) 
 
 
                                  -----------------------------  
 
 
P R E S E N T :  
                  THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S. K. SAHOO 
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Date of Judgment: 01.06.2023 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
          
S. K. SAHOO, J.  The petitioners have filed these writ petitions 
challenging the order dated 31.05.2019 under Annexu re-12 
passed by the Commissioner -cum- Secretary, Higher Education 
Department, Government of Odisha in rejecting the c laim for 
regularization of their services in the posts of Ju nior Assistant in 
Sambalpur University (hereafter, in short, ‘University’). 
  Since the issues involved in all the writ petitio ns are 
identical, with the consent of parties, all the mat ters were heard 
analogously and disposed of by this common judgment. 
 2. The facts of the case are stated in short as und er:- 
2.1.  As per the Private Examination Rules, 2001 
(hereafter ‘2001 Rules’) of the University, the Pro gramme 
Coordinator of the Private Examination Cell (hereafter ‘PEC’) who

3
is appointed by the Vice-Chancellor from among the 
Professors/Readers of the University as per Rule 4. 1.1 and is the 
Head of PEC subject to the control of the Vice-Chancellor and has 
control over all regular and part-time staff engage d for non-
confidential work and has got power as per Rule 5.2  to appoint 
additional staff (part-time/daily wage) as and when  required for 
private examination work with the approval of the V ice-
Chancellor, considering the requirement and necessi ty in the 
private examination work of the University, by offi ce order dated 
11.01.2002 under Annexure-2 series, with the due ap proval of 
the Vice-Chancellor, engaged the petitioner Surendr a Barik who 
is having qualification of M.A., LLPM, PGDCA and be longed to 
Scheduled Caste category and the petitioner Premraj  Panda who 
is having qualification of B.A. with PGDCA and belo nged to 
General category, in the PEC of the University both on daily wage 
basis of Rs.58.50 paisa for a period of 179 days i. e. w.e.f. 
11.01.2002 to 30.06.2002 and in the said engagement  order, it 
was mentioned that the authority of the University reserved the 
right to discontinue their engagement as and when n ecessary 
and that they would not claim such engagement for c ontinuance 
and/or regular assignment in future. The petitioner s Surendra 
Barik and Premraj Panda joined as Office Assistants  on

4
12.01.2002 in the PEC which was a non-sanctioned po st and 
their daily wage was enhanced to Rs.70/- per day w. e.f. 
01.07.2002 each and subsequently enhanced to Rs.2,5 00/- per 
month, Rs.3,000/- per month, Rs.4,000/- per month, Rs.5,000/- 
per month, Rs.7,100/- per month and Rs.8,880/- per month 
each w.e.f. 01.10.2003, 03.07.2007, 01.06.2009, 01. 02.2013, 
01.03.2014 and 01.09.2017 respectively and for paym ent of 
wages, sanction orders were issued from time to time. 
  The petitioner Sudhakar Barik  and  the petitioner 
Sadananda Pradhan who are having qualification of B .A. and 
belonged to O.B.C. category were engaged in the PEC , each on a 
daily wage basis of Rs.42.50 paisa for a period of 59 days i.e. 
from 01.11.1999 to 31.12.1999 and sanction order wa s issued 
on 11.02.2000 under Annexure-2 series for payment o f their 
wages for such period with the approval of the Vice -Chancellor in 
the concerned files and they were later on allowed to work as 
Office Assistants in the PEC which was a non-sanctioned post and 
their daily wage was enhanced to Rs.58.50 per day w .e.f. 
01.09.2001 each and subsequently enhanced to Rs.70/ - per day 
each, Rs.2,500/- per month, Rs.3,000/- per month, R s.4,000/- 
per month, Rs.5,000/- per month, Rs.7,000/- per mon th, 
Rs.7,100/- per month and Rs.8,880/- per month each w.e.f.

5
01.07.2002, 01.10.2003, 03.07.2007, 01.06.2009, 01. 02.2013, 
06.07.2013, 01.03.2014 and 01.09.2017 respectively and for 
payment of wages, sanction orders were issued from time to 
time.  
  The petitioner Aurobindo Behera who was having 
qualification of B.A. and belonged to Scheduled Cas te category 
was engaged in the PEC on a daily wage basis of Rs. 42.50 paisa 
for a period of twenty one days i.e. from 10.08.200 0 to 
31.08.2000 and sanction order was issued for paymen t of his 
wages for such period with the approval of the Vice -Chancellor in 
the concerned files and he was later on allowed to work as Office 
Assistant in the PEC which was a non-sanctioned pos t and his 
daily wage was enhanced to Rs.58.50 per day w.e.f. 01.09.2001 
and subsequently enhanced to Rs.70/- per day, Rs.2, 500/- per 
month, Rs.3,000/- per month, Rs.4,000/- per month, Rs.5,000/- 
per month, Rs.7,000/- per month, Rs.7,100/- per mon th and 
Rs.8,880/- per month w.e.f. 01.07.2002, 01.10.2003,  
03.07.2007, 01.06.2009, 01.02.2013, 06.07.2013, 01. 03.2014 
and 01.09.2017 respectively and for payment of wage s, sanction 
orders were issued from time to time.  
 2.2.   The Registrar of the University by letter d ated 
01.08.2014 under Annexure-6 requested the Governmen t in the

6
Department of Higher Education to regularize the se rvices of 
forty three nos. of candidates including the petiti oners who were 
engaged on contractual/daily wage/temporary basis. It is 
needless to say that by that time, the petitioners were having 
more than twelve years of experience in the post of  Office 
Assistant. While the petitioners were continuing as  such, in 
pursuance of the decision of the Syndicate of the U niversity vide 
resolution no.45 dated 16.07.2015, the posts held b y the 
petitioners as Office Assistant and Computer Assist ants under 
different units were re-designated as ‘Junior Assis tant’ on 
temporary basis by office order dated 16.07.2015 un der 
Annexure-8. The counter affidavit filed on behalf o f the opposite 
parties nos.2 to 4 indicates that the service of th e petitioners 
Surendra Barik, Sudhakar Barik, Sadananda Pradhan, Aurobinda 
Behera and Premraj Panda was extended 46, 68, 68, 6 3 and 46 
times respectively with break up to 16.07.2015.  
 2.3.  The University by letter dated 26.11.2015 un der 
Annexure-9 requested the Special Secretary to the H on’ble 
Chancellor to accord necessary permission for regul arization of 
services of the petitioners along with others in or der to enable 
the University to cope up with the emerging situati on and taking 
into account the persistent demand of the employees ’

7
association. In the said letter, it is stated that considering the 
engagement of the petitioners, length of service an d satisfactory 
performance, the Syndicate vide resolution no.18 da ted 
13.02.2014 has allowed payment of pay plus grade pay in favour 
of the employees from the limited funds generated o ut of the 
own sources. 
 2.4.  Since no action was taken by the Government on the 
recommendation made by the University, the petition ers 
Surendra Barik, Sudhakar Barik, Sadananda Pradhan, Aurobinda 
Behera and Premraj Panda moved this Court in writ p etitions 
bearing W.P.(C) No.23327 of 2015,  W.P.(C) No.23596 of 2015, 
W.P.(C) No.23597 of 2015, W.P.(C) No.23598 of 2015 and 
W.P.(C) No.23599 of 2015 respectively ventilating t heir 
grievances for regularization of their service and this Court by 
order dated 07.01.2016 disposed of the writ petitio ns directing 
the State Authority to consider the recommendation made by the 
University and pass appropriate order by sanctionin g the posts 
and regularize the services of the petitioners taki ng into 
consideration that they are continuing in service w .e.f. 2002, 
1999, 1999, 2000 and 2002 respectively in accordanc e with law 
as expeditiously as possible preferably within a pe riod of four 
months from the date of communication of the order.

8
 2.5. The Registrar of the University vide letter d ated 
18.08.2016 addressed a letter to the State Governme nt in 
Higher Education Department informing about the nec essity of 
manpower in managing day to day affair of the Unive rsity 
considering the increase in workload of the Univers ity due to 
increase in the number of colleges and opening of n ew 
departments/courses and to take steps for regularis ation of the 
services of the petitioners.  A list of forty group C employees 
engaged in the University up to 12.11.2013 includin g the names 
of the petitioners in serial no.36, 34, 33, 35 and 37 respectively  
was submitted with the letter dated 18.08.2016. 
 2.6.  The Registrar of the University vide letter dated 
22.10.2016 also intimated the State Government in H igher 
Education Department after receipt of copy of the o rders passed 
by this Court in the writ petitions filed by the pe titioners that the 
Syndicate of the University vide resolution no.45 d ated 
16.05.2015 by considering the length of service of the 
petitioners to be more than ten years and their edu cational 
qualification as per the established rule, redesign ated the 
petitioners as ‘Junior Assistant’ on temporary basi s against 
vacant sanctioned strength of Junior Assistant of t he University 
Establishment.

9
 2.7. The State Government intimated the Registrar of the 
University vide letter dated 11.04.2018 under Annex ure-11 for 
filling up of forty one nos. of vacant posts of Jun ior Assistant as 
per the Orissa University Recruitment & Promotion o f Non-
Teaching Employees Rules, 1992 (hereafter in short,  ‘OURP 
Rules, 1992’).  
 2.8.  The University vide letter dated 25.07.2018 
requested the State Government in the Higher Educat ion 
Department for according approval for regularizatio n of thirty 
two nos. of Junior Assistants by submitting a list including the 
names of petitioners Surendra Barik, Sudhakar Barik, Sadananda 
Pradhan, Aurobinda Behera and Premraj Panda in seri al nos.28, 
26, 25, 27 and 29 respectively who were working on temporary 
basis with remuneration equal to pay plus grade pay  of the 
corresponding cadre, who were having requisite educ ational 
qualification as per OURP Rules, 1992.  
 2.9. The Registrar of the University issued anothe r letter 
dated 08.09.2018 in reply to the letter no.24081/HE  dated 
24.08.2018 of the State Government in the Higher Ed ucation 
Department reiterating for filling up thirty two po sts of Junior 
Assistants and giving detailed information in respe ct of the 
petitioners Surendra Barik, Sudhakar Barik, Sadanan da Pradhan,

10  
Aurobinda Behera and Premraj Panda whose names find  place in 
serial nos. 28, 26, 25, 27 and 29 respectively and other Junior 
Assistants who were working on temporary basis in t he 
University. It was indicated that the petitioners w ere appointed 
with the approval of the Vice-Chancellor and the of fice orders 
were also enclosed. However, it was indicated that the vacancies 
have not been notified to the local Employment Exch ange, 
advertisement was not made for recruitment and no c ompetitive 
examination was held, but the petitioners were rede signated as 
Junior Assistant vide Office Order No.6047/Estt-I, dated 
16.07.2015. 
 2.9.  By the impugned order dated 31.05.2019 under  
Annexure-12, the State Government rejected the case s of the 
petitioners on the ground that the petitioners had not worked for 
more than ten years as on 10.04.2006 i.e. the date of passing of 
the order of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of State of 
Karnataka -Vrs.- Umadevi reported in (2006) 4 Supre me 
Court Cases 1 and the appointment was not made against any 
sanctioned post. Even after the impugned order was passed, 
communications were made to the petitioners by the Registrar of 
the University on dated 24.09.2021 as per the order  of the Vice-
Chancellor wherein submission of regularisation pro posal of

11  
thirty two Junior Assistants working on temporary basis including 
the names of the petitioners to the Government in H igher 
Education Department were indicated.  
 3.  No counter affidavit has been filed by the State 
Government.  
4. 
 The  Opposite parties nos.2 to 4 have filed counter 
affidavit stating, inter alia, that the posts again st which the 
petitioners were appointed were non-sanctioned post s and prior 
approval of the State Government had not been obtai ned by the 
University for creating such posts. It is further s tated that the 
action of the University to engage the petitioners against such 
non-sanctioned posts was in contravention of sectio n 22 of 
Odisha University Act, 1989 (hereafter ‘1989 Act’).  It is also 
stated that the Syndicate of the University vide resolution No. 45 
dated 16.05.2015, re-designated the petitioners as ‘Junior 
Assistants’ without prior approval of the State Gov ernment and 
the appointment of the petitioners as Junior Assistants was made 
in violation of the OURP Rules, 1992 by not followi ng the 
prescribed open competitive selection process. It i s further 
stated that in view of the ratio laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court in the case of Umadevi (supra), the appointment of the 
petitioners is illegal as because their appointment s have not

12  
been made against any sanctioned post and hence the  services 
of the petitioners cannot be regularized. It is fur ther stated that 
even if it is held that the appointments of the pet itioners are not 
illegal but irregular, then also the services of th e petitioners 
cannot be regularized as they had not worked for mo re than ten 
years as on 10.04.2006 i.e. the date of judgment of  the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in Umadevi  (supra). It is further stated that as 
per the notification of the University dated 08.05. 2002 under 
Annexure-1, it has been clearly mandated that the p ost of Office 
Assistant is purely temporary and no way served as a right of 
claim for permanent post and the services would be terminated 
at any time without assigning any reason thereof. I t is further 
stated that the Syndicate in its meeting held on 16 .05.2015 
resolved that the employees working as Office Assis tants and 
Computer Assistants might be brought to the establi shment fold 
of the University as Junior Assistant (T) subject t o fulfillment of 
the following conditions and availability of sanctioned vacancies:- 
(i)  The employee should have completed not less 
than ten years of service in the University funded 
units only;

13  
(ii)  They should have possessed minimum 
qualification of Junior Assistant as prescribed in 
OURP Rules, 1991; 
(iii)  Their original appointment should have been 
approved by the Vice-Chancellor; 
(iv)  Prior to their re-designation as Junior Asst. 
(Temporary) under Establishment fold, they will have 
to furnish an affidavit in the prescribed format of  the 
University on a non-judicial stamp paper to the effect 
that they will neither claim for any retrospective 
financial and seniority benefit nor claim for 
permanent absorption in the University. 
 It is admitted by the University that on fulfillmen t of 
the above conditions by the petitioners along with others, they 
were re-designated as Junior Assistant (T) and were  brought to 
the establishment fold of the University. It is fur ther stated that 
the Syndicate resolution No.45 dated 16.05.2015 has  been 
revoked in the meeting of the Syndicate held on 21. 12.2021 and 
the office order dated 16.07.2015 under Annexure-8 has been 
withdrawn as per office Order dated 04.01.2022. It is also stated 
that the petitioners have admitted that the posts h eld by them 
are not sanctioned posts and though recommendation has been

14  
made by the University, but the same has not been a ccepted by 
the State Government.  
 It is stated by the University that as per section 22 of 
the 1989 Act, the posts shall be created by the Hon ’ble 
Chancellor subject to specific allotment of funds f or the purpose 
in the budget of the University and shall be in acc ordance with 
the yardstick formulated by the University with the  approval of 
the State Government and whenever posts are created  beyond 
the yardstick approved by the State Government, pri or 
concurrence of the State Government on the decision  of the 
Syndicate for regularization of the services of the  petitioners 
along with others in the University was necessary a nd unless or 
until the Government  had given concurrence, the Un iversity 
would not be able to regularize any person.  
5. 
 Rejoinder affidavits have been filed by the petitioners 
in their respective writ petitions wherein it is st ated that though 
the posts were admissible and justified and the Uni versity had 
moved the State Government time and again in a seri es of 
letters for sanction of such posts against which th e petitioners 
were working on account of increase of workload of the 
University day by day due to increase in the number  of colleges 
and opening of new departments/hostels/courses to cope up with

15  
the present needs and the fact that certain numbers  of posts of 
Junior Assistant have been sanctioned by the State Government 
in the meantime, but all the same the opposite part y no.1 while 
passing the impugned order has not taken into consi deration all 
such facts and whimsically rejected the claim of th e petitioners 
solely on the ground that the posts were not sancti oned in which 
the petitioners were working and therefore, the pet itioners 
cannot take the advantage of the judgment of Umadevi  (supra). 
It is further stated that the petitioners have been  engaged  by 
the University and they are having requisite qualif ication and 
experience and they are continuing against the post s and their 
services have been utilized against Group C post in  which they 
have rendered more than twenty years of service to the 
University. It is stated that there are catena of decisions in which 
it has been held that if a ministerial staff in Gro up C post has 
completed six years of service, his case should be considered for 
regularisation against such post. 
6. 
 Mr. Budhadev Routray, learned Senior Advocate 
appearing for the petitioners contended that the en gagement of 
the petitioners was made in accordance with 2001 Ru les by a 
competent authority like Programme Coordinator whic h was also 
approved by the Vice-Chancellor of the University. He further

16  
contended that when to meet emergent situation and work load, 
the engagement of the petitioners was made on daily  wage basis 
in the PEC and they have continued for a period of more than 
two decades, it would be unfair and unreasonable no t to 
regularize them particularly when sanctioned posts are now 
available and the petitioners have requisite qualif ication to hold 
such posts. It is argued that Registrar of the Univ ersity under 
Annexure-6 intimated the State Government in the De partment 
of Higher Education about 39 nos. of vacant posts o f Junior 
Assistant and 43 nos. of candidates engaged on contractual/daily 
wage/temporary basis and requested the Government f or 
regularization of the incumbents in the post of Jun ior Assistant. 
The Registrar also informed the State Government ab out the 
Syndicate’s decision regarding re-designation of th e petitioners 
along with others as ‘Junior Assistant’ on temporar y basis 
against the vacant sanctioned strength of Junior As sistant 
pursuant to which the Government was also pleased t o allow for 
filling up of 41 nos. of vacant posts of Junior Ass istant in the 
University, but despite such communication and over looking 
such decision of the State Government under Annexur e-11, the 
impugned order under Annexure-12 has been passed re jecting 
the cases of the petitioners for regularization.

17  
 Learned counsel further urged that the reason shown  
in the impugned order that the petitioners had not completed ten 
years of service as on 10.04.2006, i.e. the date of  
pronouncement of judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Co urt in 
Umadevi  (supra) has no bearing as the said case has been 
misinterpreted while considering the case of the pe titioners for 
regularization. He further contended that the law i s well settled 
by a series of judgments of the Hon’ble Apex Court as well as 
this Court that the purpose and intent of the decision rendered in 
Umadevi  (supra) was two folds; (i) to prevent irregular an d 
illegal appointments in future and (ii) to confer b enefit on those 
who have been irregularly appointed in the post. He  further 
argued that the State Government being a model empl oyer, 
cannot exploit the services of the petitioners by n ot giving them 
the benefit of regularization and if irregular appo intees have 
completed ten years of service, then their services  should be 
regularized. 
 Learned counsel further urged that even though the 
initial engagement of the petitioners was on temporary basis and 
not against any sanctioned post, but considering th e fact that 
there was necessity of manpower in the University a nd the 
University has been utilizing the services of the p etitioners for

18  
two decades and the petitioners have got requisite qualification, 
the failure of the State Government in taking an early decision to 
create posts in spite of repeated communication fro m the side of 
University and then rejecting the claim of regulari zation of 
services of the petitioners even when posts were sa nctioned is 
arbitrary and amounts to sheer exploitation. Mr. Ro utray, 
learned counsel further contended that absorbing th e petitioners 
in the regular posts would not cause any additional  financial 
burden to the State exchequer.  
 Learned counsel emphatically contended that the 
Registrar of the University has furnished a list of employees, who 
have been allowed payment of pay plus grade pay as per the 
resolution No.18 dated 13.02.2014 of the Syndicate for 
regularization of the services of the petitioners a long with others 
and thus, instead of regularizing the services of t he petitioners, 
the action of the opposite parties in rejecting the ir claim for 
regularization is not sustainable in the eye of law  and thus, the 
impugned order under Annexure-12 should be quashed and 
necessary direction be issued to the opposite parti es for 
regularization of the services of the petitioners i n the posts of 
Junior Assistant in the University.

19  
 In support of his contention, learned counsel for t he 
petitioners has placed reliance on the decisions of  the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court as well as this Court in the cases of  State of 
Karnataka and others -Vrs.- M.L. Kesari reported in (2010) 
9 Supreme Court Cases 247 , Nihal Singh -Vrs.- State of 
Punjab reported in (2013) 14 Supreme Court Cases 65 , 
Sanatan Sahoo -Vrs.- State of Odisha reported in 20 17 
(II) ILR-CUT-1059 (Orissa High Court upheld by Supr eme 
Court in SLP No.11911 of 2018) , Narendra Kumar Tiwari 
and others -Vrs.- The State of Jharkhand and others  
reported in (2018) 8 Supreme Court Cases 238 , Sheo 
Narain Nagar -Vrs.- State of U.P. reported in A.I.R . 2018 
S.C. 233 , Basanta Kumar Barik -Vrs.- State of Odisha and 
others reported in 2021 (III) ILR-CUT 624 . 
7. Per contra, Mr. Saswat Das, learned Additional 
Government Advocate has filed written note of argum ent and 
argued that the conditions of services of the emplo yees of the 
University including the present petitioners are go verned by the 
provisions of 1989 Act and the first statute framed  thereunder. 
Learned counsel for the State further argued that s ection 22 of 
the 1989 Act deals with the provisions for creation of posts in the 
University and  on a bare perusal of the aforesaid provision, it

20  
would be apparent that the post of officers, teache rs and 
employees of the University shall be created and the scale of pay 
and allowances attached to such posts shall be dete rmined by 
the Chancellor subject to specific allotment of fun ds for the 
purpose of payment of the concerned University and shall be in 
accordance with the yardstick formulated by the Uni versity with 
the prior approval of the State Government. Referri ng to Rule 
10(a) of Odisha Government Rules of Business and Se ction 22 of 
1989 Act, he argued that on a conjoint reading of b oth the 
provisions leave no room for doubt that prior appro val of the 
State Government for creation of posts is mandatory  and though 
the Department of  Higher Education is the Nodal Department for 
Higher Education but creation of posts in the Unive rsity requires 
prior approval/sanction of the Finance Department o f the State 
Government which was obviously required to be worke d out 
through Department of Higher Education. 
 Learned counsel for the State argued that so far a s 
the petitioners is concerned, although they were engaged initially 
on daily wage basis for some period and allowed to work as 
Office Assistants which was extended from time to t ime and 
subsequently was re-designated as Junior Assistant,  but the fact 
remains that, there is no provision provided under the 1989 Act

21  
or under the OURP Rules, 1992  for such re-designation. On the 
contrary, the rules prescribed that the posts are t o be created 
with the sanction of competent authority (State) an d as such, 
posts can only filled up through a duly constituted  Selection 
Committee and by competitive selection process thro ugh open 
advertisement in compliance to the mandate of Artic les 14 and 
16 of the Constitution of India. He further submitt ed that in the 
case in hand, since the resolution of the Syndicate  of the 
University bearing No.45 dated 16.05.2015, re-desig nating the 
petitioners as Junior Assistants without prior appr oval of the 
State Government has been revoked by the Syndicate in their 
meeting held on 21.12.2021, the petitioners are no more 
continuing as Junior Assistant and therefore, they have got no 
right to claim regularization of service. Learned c ounsel further 
argued that there is no doubt that creation of post  and 
regularization in service is a prerogative of the e mployer keeping 
in view the number of factors like the nature of wo rk, number of 
posts lying vacant, the financial condition of the employer, the 
additional financial burden likely to be caused, th e suitability of 
the workmen for the job, the manner and reasons for  which the 
initial appointments were made, however, when the s tatutory 
provisions have not been followed by the University  while

22  
creating the posts and re-designating the petitione rs as Junior 
Assistant, therefore, the claim of the petitioners for 
regularization of service merits no consideration a nd thus, the 
writ petitions are liable to be dismissed. 
 In support of such submissions, he has relied upon  
the judgments of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the c ase of 
Divisional Manager,  Aravali Golf Club and another -Vrs.- 
Chander Hass reported in (2008) 1 Supreme Court Cas es 
683 , Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation and 
Anr. -Vrs.- Casteribe Rajya Parivahan Karamchari 
Sanghatana reported in (2009) 8 Supreme Court Cases 
556  and  The Managing Director, Ajmer Vidhyut Vitaran 
Nigam Ltd., Ajmer and another -Vrs.- Chiggan Lal an d 
others reported in 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1351 .  
8. Mr. Kousik Ananda Guru, Advocate appearing on 
behalf of University contended that the posts again st which the 
petitioners along with others was appointed were no t sanctioned 
posts and the prior approval of the State Govt. has also not been 
obtained by the University for creation of such pos ts. The action 
of the University to engage the petitioners against  the non-
sanctioned posts was in contravention of section 22  of 1989 Act. 
He reiterated the stand taken by the University in the counter

23  
affidavit and argued that the petitioners are not e ntitled to get 
any relief. 
9. Before adverting to the contentions raised by th e 
learned counsel for the respective parties, let me now jot down 
the factual scenario as projected before me which a re as 
follows:-  
(i) Considering the requirement and necessity in th e private 
examination work of the University, the Programme C oordinator 
in exercising his power under Rule 5.2 of 2001 Rule s of the 
University,  engaged the petitioners in the PEC of the Universit y 
on daily wage basis for different periods from the date of 
engagement in the Cell with the due approval of the  Vice-
Chancellor.  
(ii) The petitioners who were having requisite educ ational 
qualification joined as Office Assistants in the PEC.  
(iii) The petitioners’ daily wages were enhanced by the University 
from time to time. Considering the engagement of th e 
petitioners, length of service and satisfactory per formance, the 
Syndicate vide resolution no.18 dated 13.02.2014 al lowed 
payment of pay plus grade pay in favour of the empl oyees 
including the petitioners from the limited funds ge nerated out of 
the own sources.

24  
(iv) The Registrar of the University by letter date d 01.08.2014  
requested the State Govt. in the Dept. of Higher Ed ucation for 
regularization of 43 nos. of candidates against the posts of Junior 
Assistant including the petitioners.  
(v) While the petitioners was continuing as such, a s on 
01.07.2015, a total number of 40 vacancies of posts  of Junior 
Assistant were shown and in pursuance of the decisi on of the 
Syndicate of the University vide resolution no.45 d ated 
16.07.2015, the posts held by the petitioners and s ome others 
as Office Assistants and Computer Assistants under different 
units were re-designated as ‘Junior Assistant’ on temporary basis 
by office order dated 16.07.2015.  
(vi) On 26.11.2015, the Registrar, Sambalpur Univer sity 
requested the Special Secretary to Hon’ble Chancell or to accord 
necessary permission for regularization of services  of employees 
to enable the University to cope up with emerging s ituation and 
persistent demand of employees from different quart ers by 
submitting list of such employees to place it befor e appropriate 
authority.  
(vii) The petitioners approached this Court by fili ng writ petitions 
ventilating their grievances for regularization of their services in 
which direction was issued by this Court to the Sta te Govt. in

25  
Higher Education Department as per order dated 07.0 1.2016 to 
consider the recommendation made by the University and to 
pass appropriate order by sanctioning the posts and to regularize 
the services of the petitioners taking into conside ration that he 
was continuing in service since long.  
(viii) On 18.08.2016 considering the increase in wo rkload of the 
University due to increase in number of colleges an d opening of 
new departments/hostels/courses, the Registrar of the University 
requested the State Govt. in Higher Education Dept.  for 
regularization of services of contractual/daily wag ers/NMR 
employees of the University.  
(ix) The Registrar of the University on 22.10.2016 communicated 
the Higher Education Department about the re-designation of the 
incumbents like the petitioners and others as Junio r Assistants 
vide resolution dated 16.05.2015, who have rendered  more than 
ten years of service and possess educational qualif ication as per 
rules.  
(x)  The State Govt. in the Department of Higher Ed ucation on 
11.04.2018 intimated the Registrar of the Universit y about filling 
up of 41 nos. of vacant posts of Junior Assistant a s per OURP 
Rules, 1992.

26  
(xi) The Registrar of the University on 25.07.2018/ 08.09.2018 
requested the State Govt. in the Department of Higher Education 
by submitting a list of 32 nos. of candidates worki ng as Junior 
Assistants on temporary basis against sanctioned po sts having 
requisite qualification as per OURP Rules, 1992 to accord 
approval to University for their regularization aga inst the 
released 41 posts. The names of the petitioners fou nd place in 
such lists.  
(xii) The opp. party no.1 rejected the case of the petitioners as 
per order dated 31.05.2019 mainly on the ground tha t they had 
not completed ten years of service as on 2006 and t he posts 
were not sanctioned. 
10.      At this stage, it would be profitable to d iscuss the 
principles enunciated in the citations placed by th e learned 
counsel for the petitioners. 
 In the case of M.L. Kesari and others  (supra) , the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court in paragraphs 7 and 8 held as follows:- 
“7. It is evident from the above that there is an 
exception to the general principles against 
“regularisation” enunciated in Umadevi  (supra) , 
if the following conditions are fulfilled:- 
(i) The employee concerned should have worked 
for 10 years or more in duly sanctioned post 
without the benefit or protection of the interim

27  
order of any court or tribunal. In other words, 
the State Government or its instrumentality 
should have employed the employee and 
continued him in service voluntarily and 
continuously for more than ten years. 
(ii) The appointment of such employee should 
not be illegal, even if irregular. Where the 
appointments are not made or continued against 
sanctioned posts or where the persons 
appointed do not possess the prescribed 
minimum qualifications, the appointments will be 
considered to be illegal. But where the person 
employed possessed the prescribed 
qualifications and was working against 
sanctioned posts, but had been selected without 
undergoing the process of open competitive 
selection, such appointments are considered to 
be irregular. 
8. Umadevi  (supra)  casts a duty upon the 
Government or instrumentality concerned, to 
take steps to regularise the services of those 
irregularly appointed employees who had served 
for more than ten years without the benefit or 
protection of any interim orders of courts or 
tribunals, as a one-time measure. Umadevi  
(supra)  directed that such one-time measure 
must be set in motion within six months from 
the date of its decision (rendered on 10-4-
2006).”

28  
This decision supports the contentions raised by th e 
learned counsel for the petitioners for regularisat ion of service of 
the petitioners to a great extent inasmuch as the p etitioners not 
only possess the prescribed qualification for the p ost of Junior 
Assistant but also they are also working against th e sanctioned 
posts at least from 11.04.2018 when the State Govt.  in the 
Department of Higher Education allowed the Registra r of the 
University for filling up of 41 nos. of vacant post s of Junior 
Assistant in the University. The petitioners have n ot only been 
employed by the University but also allowed to cont inue in 
service voluntarily and continuously for more than twenty years 
by now after they were engaged and nothing has been  brought 
on record by the opposite parties that such continuance was with 
the benefit or protection of the interim order of a ny Court or 
Tribunal. Of course, the petitioners had not worked  for more 
than ten years as on 10.04.2006 on which date the j udgment in 
Umadevi  (supra) was pronounced, however, it cannot be lost 
sight of the fact that the University has extracted  the work from 
the petitioners for years together and now, by effl ux of time, the 
petitioners have become over-aged and they are not in a 
position to participate in any selection process.

29  
 In the case of Nihal Singh (supra) , the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court held as follows:- 
“22. It was further declared in Umadevi  that 
the jurisdiction of the Constitutional Courts 
under Article 226 or Article 32 cannot be 
exercised to compel the State or to enable the 
State to perpetuate an illegality. This Court held 
that compelling the State to absorb persons who 
were employed by the State as casual workers 
or daily-wage workers for a long period on the 
ground that such a practice would be an 
arbitrary practice and violative of Article 14 and 
would itself offend another aspect of Article 14 
i.e. the State chose initially to appoint such 
persons without any rational procedure 
recognized by law thereby depriving vast 
number of other eligible candidates who were 
similarly situated to compete for such 
employment. 
23. Even going by the principles laid down in 
Umadevi 's case, we are of the opinion that the 
State of Punjab cannot be heard to say that the 
appellants are not entitled to be absorbed into 
the services of the State on permanent basis as 
their appointments were purely temporary and 
not against any sanctioned posts created by the 
State.

30  
xx   xx   xx   xx  xx  xx   xx   xx   xx   xx  xx   xx     
35. Therefore, it is clear that the existence of 
the need for creation of the posts is a relevant 
factor reference to which the executive 
government is required to take rational decision 
based on relevant consideration. In our opinion, 
when the facts such as the ones obtaining in the 
instant case demonstrate that there is need for 
the creation of posts, the failure of the executive  
government to apply its mind and take a 
decision to create posts or stop extracting work 
from persons such as the appellants herein for 
decades together itself would be arbitrary action 
(inaction) on the part of the State. 
36. The other factor which the State is required 
to keep in mind while creating or abolishing 
posts is the financial implications involved in 
such a decision. The creation of posts 
necessarily means additional financial burden on 
the exchequer of the State. Depending upon the 
priorities of the State, the allocation of the 
finances is no doubt exclusively within the 
domain of the legislature. However in the instant 
case creation of new posts would not create any 
additional financial burden to the State as the 
various banks at whose disposal the services of 
each of the appellants is made available have 
agreed to bear the burden. If absorbing the 
appellants into the services of the State and

31  
providing benefits at par with the police officers 
of similar rank employed by the State results in 
further financial commitment, it is always open 
for the State to demand the banks to meet such 
additional burden. Apparently no such demand 
has ever been made by the State. The result is-
the various banks which avail the services of 
these appellants enjoy the supply of cheap 
labour over a period of decades. It is also 
pertinent to notice that these banks are public 
sector banks. 
37. We are of the opinion that neither the 
Government of Punjab nor these public sector 
banks can continue such a practice consistent 
with their obligation to function in accordance 
with the Constitution. Umadevi's judgment 
cannot become a licence for exploitation by the 
State and its instrumentalities. 
38. For all the above mentioned reasons, we are 
of the opinion that the appellants are entitled to 
be absorbed in the services of the State. The 
appeals are accordingly allowed. The judgments 
under appeal are set aside.” 
 This decision supports the contentions raised by t he 
learned counsel for the petitioners for regularisat ion of services 
of the petitioners inasmuch as since last two decad es, there was 
need in the University for the creation of posts, b ut in spite of

32  
repeated communication from Registrar of the Univer sity in that 
respect, the failure of the executive government to  apply its 
mind and take a decision to create posts or stop ex tracting work 
from the petitioners and similarly situated persons  like the 
petitioners for decades together would reflect arbi trary action 
(inaction) on the part of the State and if at this age, the 
petitioners are thrown out of service, then it woul d be sheer 
exploitation of the petitioners by the opposite parties. 
 In the case of Sanatan Sahoo  (supra) , this Court in 
paragraph 9 has held as follows:- 
“9. Admittedly in the present case, the 
petitioners having the requisite qualification was 
engaged as Data Entry Operator since 
September, 1995 and he has been continuing as 
such till date without the intervention of the 
Courts. He approached the Tribunal in the year 
2013 for his regularization before the notification 
issued by the State Government regarding 
Odisha Group 'C' and Group 'D' posts 
(contractual appointment) Rules, 2003. The 
recruitment rule came into force only in the year 
2008 and the rule regarding contractual 
engagement as contended by the State 
Government was followed later on. Thus the 
engagement of the petitioners at best can be

33  
termed as irregular engagement and not illegal 
engagement. That apart, it is also admitted that 
sanctioned posts are available since 2009 and 
the petitioners had also completed more than 10 
years by then. In view of the discussions made 
hereinabove paragraphs and in the peculiar facts 
and circumstances of this case, this Court is of 
the opinion that the Tribunal has lost sight of all  
such facts while passing the impugned order and 
it has not appreciated the entire facts in right 
perspective in the light of the aforesaid decisions 
of the Apex Court. Thus, this Court sets aside 
the impugned order dated 14.05.2015 passed in 
O.A. No. 3421 of 2013 and remits the matter 
back to the authorities to regularize the service 
of the petitioners by applying the 
aforementioned ratio and to extend 
consequential service benefits to the petitioners 
accordingly, within a period of eight weeks. The 
writ petition is disposed of accordingly.” 
 This decision supports the contentions raised by t he 
learned counsel for the petitioners for regularizat ion of the 
services of the petitioners inasmuch as the petitio ners who were 
having requisite qualification were engaged as Offi ce Assistants 
at the initial stage by the Programme Coordinator o n daily wage 
basis in exercising his power under Rule 5.2 of 200 1 Rules of the 
University with the approval of the Vice-Chancellor  and they

34  
have been continuing till date without the interven tion of any 
Court order and that the Syndicate vide resolution no.18 dated 
13.02.2014 has allowed them to receive pay plus gra de pay and 
the posts have been re-designated as Junior Assistants.  
 In the case of Narendra Kumar Tiwari (supra) , the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court in paragraphs 7 and 8 held as follows:- 
“7. The purpose and intent of the decision in 
Umadevi  was therefore two-fold, namely, to 
prevent irregular or illegal appointments in the 
future and secondly, to confer a benefit on those 
who had been irregularly appointed in the past. 
The fact that the State of Jharkhand continued 
with the irregular appointments for almost a 
decade after the decision in Umadevi  is a clear 
indication that it believes that it was all right t o 
continue with irregular appointments, and 
whenever required, terminate the services of the 
irregularly appointed employees on the ground 
that they were irregularly appointed. This is 
nothing but a form of exploitation of the 
employees by not giving them the benefits of 
regularization and by placing the sword of 
Damocles over their head. This is precisely what 
Umadevi  and Kesari  sought to avoid. 
8. If a strict and literal interpretation, forgetti ng 
the spirit of the decision of the Constitution 
Bench in Umadevi , is to be taken into

35  
consideration then no irregularly appointed 
employee of the State of Jharkhand could ever 
be regularised since that State came into 
existence only on 15th November, 2000 and the 
cut-off date was fixed as 10th April, 2006. In 
other words, in this manner the pernicious 
practice of indefinitely continuing irregularly 
appointed employees would be perpetuated 
contrary to the intent of the Constitution 
Bench.” 
This decision supports the contentions raised by th e 
learned counsel for the petitioners for regularisat ion of services 
of the petitioners inasmuch as the engagement of th e petitioners 
as per 2001 Rules of the University which was four years prior to 
the decision of the Constitution Bench in Umadevi  (supra) 
cannot be said to be an illegal one. At this stage,  after so many 
years of continuous service, if they are thrown out  of services 
and the benefits of regularization are not extended to them, then 
it would be a sheer case of exploitation. 
In the case of Sheo Narain Nagar  (supra) , the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court in paragraph 8 held as follows:- 
“8. When we consider the prevailing scenario, it 
is painful to note that the decision in Umadevi  
(supra) has not been properly understood and

36  
rather wrongly applied by various State 
Governments. We have called for the data in the 
instant case to ensure as to how many 
employees were working on contract basis or ad 
hoc basis or daily-wage basis in different State 
departments. We can take judicial notice that 
widely aforesaid practice is being continued. 
Though this Court has emphasised that 
incumbents should be appointed on regular 
basis as per Rules but new devise of making 
appointment on contract basis has been 
adopted, employment is offered on daily-wage 
basis etc. in exploitative forms. This situation 
was not envisaged by Umadevi  (supra). The 
prime intendment of the decision was that the 
employment process should be by fair means 
and not by back door entry and in the available 
pay scale. That spirit of the Umadevi (supra) has 
been ignored and conveniently overlooked by 
various State Governments/authorities. We 
regretfully make the observation that Umadevi  
(supra)  has not been implemented in its true 
spirit and has not been followed in its pith and 
substance. It is being used only as a tool for not 
regularizing the services of incumbents. They 
are being continued in service without payment 
of due salary for which they are entitled on the 
basis of Article 14, 16 read with Article 34(1)(d) 
of the Constitution of India as if they have no 
constitutional protection as envisaged in D.S.

37  
Nakara v. Union of India : A.I.R. 1983 S.C. 
130  from cradle to grave. In heydays of life, 
they are serving on exploitative terms with no 
guarantee of livelihood to be continued and in 
old age, they are going to be destituted, there 
being no provision for pension, retiral benefits 
etc. There is clear contravention of constitutional 
provisions and aspiration of downtrodden class. 
They do have equal rights and to make them 
equals, they require protection and cannot be 
dealt with arbitrarily. The kind of treatment 
meted out is not only bad but equally 
unconstitutional and is denial of rights. We have 
to strike a balance to really implement the 
ideology of Umadevi  (supra) . Thus, the time 
has come to stop the situation where Umadevi 
(supra)  can be permitted to be flouted, whereas, 
this Court has interdicted such employment way 
back in the year 2006. The employment cannot 
be on exploitative terms, whereas Umadevi  
(supra)  laid down that there should not be back 
door entry and every post should be filled by 
regular employment, but a new device has been 
adopted for making appointment on payment of 
paltry sum on contract/ad hoc basis or 
otherwise. This kind of action is not permissible, 
when we consider the pith and substance of true 
spirit in Umadevi  (supra) .”

38  
 This decision supports the contentions raised by t he 
learned counsel for the petitioners for regularisat ion of services 
of the petitioners inasmuch as their initial engage ment on daily 
wage basis cannot be said to be back door entry but on the basis 
of the power conferred on the Programme Coordinator  under 
Rule 5.2 of 2001 Rules of the University with the d ue approval of 
the Vice-Chancellor. In heydays of lives, when the petitioners 
served the institution for two decades and they are  serving as 
Junior Assistants on temporary basis in the Univers ity since long 
and having requisite qualification and their names have been 
recommended time to time by the University to the G overnment 
for regularization and there is nothing against the ir performance 
in duty, at this stage, if they are denied the bene fits of 
regularization, it would lead to arbitrariness and the action of the 
Employer State would be unconstitutional. 
 In the case of  Basanta Kumar Barik (supra) , this 
Court in paragraphs 28 and 29 held as follows:- 
“28. In the backdrop of the factual matrix as 
borne out from records placed before this Court 
and from the analysis of law laid down by the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Uma Devi's  
Case (Supra) , which has been consistently 
followed by subsequent Supreme Court

39  
judgments as well as by this Hon'ble Court, it is 
crystal clear that the long uninterrupted services 
of the Petitioners should have been considered 
by the Opp. Party No. 3 immediately after the 
Uma Devi's  judgment and his services should 
have been regularized. The judgment in Uma 
Devi's case while deprecating the temporary/ 
adhoc/ illegal appointments by the State and its 
instrumentalities, have reminded the authorities 
of their constitutional obligations. Further, as an  
one time measure, direction has been given to 
the State Government and its instrumentalities 
to constitute a screening committee and to 
regularize the services of the persons who have 
been appointed irregularly and rendered more 
than 10 years of service uninterruptedly. The 
Petitioners' initial appointment was only irregular 
and not illegal as revealed from the records of 
the case. The State Govt. and the 
instrumentalities like the Opp. Party No. 3 have 
failed to carry out the direction issued by the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Uma Devi's 
case as no such exercise as has been mandated 
have been carried out till date. Even after the 
said judgment, the exploitation of the Petitioners 
continued in the hands of the Opp. Party No. 3. 
It is also clear from the record that by the time 
the judgment in Uma Devi's case was delivered, 
the Petitioners had completed almost 10 years 
of continuous service in Opp. Party No. 3

40  
College. Further it has been specifically stated in  
the Counter affidavit filed on behalf of the Opp. 
Party No. 3 that sanctioned posts in Class IV are 
lying vacant in the college and due to want of 
approval by the Govt. the same are not being 
filled up. 
29. In such view of the matter, the Opp. Parties 
are hereby directed to carry out the exercise as 
mandated in Uma Devi's case forth with and list 
of such temporary and ad hoc employees 
working in the college be prepared and on the 
basis of their seniority and keeping in view the 
vacant posts available to be filled up, the Opp. 
Parties shall do well to regularize the service of 
the Petitioners within a period of three months 
from the date of communication of this 
judgment. Needless to say that all legitimate 
dues payable as per law be paid to the 
Petitioners within the aforesaid period.” 
  This decision also supports the contentions raised by 
the learned counsel for the petitioners for regular ization of 
services of the petitioners inasmuch as the initial  engagement of 
the petitioners may be irregular but not illegal as  revealed from 
the records of the case. They have completed two de cades of 
continuous service in the University and are having  requisite

41  
educational qualification for the post of Junior Assistant and have 
acquired vast experience in working in such post.  
 11.  At this stage, the contentions raised by Mr. Das ar e 
necessary to be considered. Without filing any coun ter affidavit 
on behalf of the State of Odisha, Mr. Das has refer red to section 
22 of the 1989 Act, which is quoted as follows:- 
“Creation of Posts :- (1) All posts of officers 
(which shall not include the Vice-Chancellor), 
teachers and other employees of a University 
shall be created and the scales of pay and 
allowances attached to such posts shall be 
determined by the Chancellor subject to specific 
allotment of funds for this purpose in the budget 
of the concerned University and shall be in 
accordance with the yardstick formulated by 
such University with the approval of the State 
Government. 
(2) Till such yardstick is finalized, the yardstick  
for the reaching posts prescribed by the 
University Grants Commission and that for the 
other corresponding posts under the State 
government shall be followed. 
(3) Whenever posts are created beyond the 
yardstick approved by the State Government 
under Sub-Section (1), prior concurrence of the 
State Government shall be obtained.”

42  
 According to Mr. Das,  in exercise of power conferred 
by Clause (3) of Article 166 of the Constitution of  India, the 
State Government has framed a rule namely Orissa Go vernment 
Rules of Business and Rule 10 of the said Rules sti pulates as 
follows:-  
“10.(1) No department shall without previous 
consultation with the Finance Department 
authorise any orders (other than orders 
pursuant to any general delegations made by 
the Finance Department) which either 
immediately or by their repercussions will affect 
the finances of the State or which in particular, 
either– 
(a) relate to the number or grading or cadres of 
posts or the emoluments or other conditions of 
service or post; or  
(b) involve any grant of land or assignment of 
revenue or concession, grant lease or licence of 
mineral or forest rights or a right to water, 
power or any easement or privilege in respect of 
such concession; or  
(c) in any way involve any relinquishment of 
revenue.” 
 
 There is no dispute there is always financial 
implications for the creation of posts and therefor e, financial 
sanction is necessary for it. The power to create a post rests with 
the Government. Whether a particular post is necess ary is a

43  
matter which depends upon the exigencies of the sit uation and 
administrative necessity. Creation of post is a mat ter of 
government policy and every sovereign government ha s this 
power in the interest and necessity of internal adm inistration. 
Reliance was placed by Mr. Das in the case of Arava li Golf Club 
(supra), in which the Hon’ble Supreme Court held th at the Court 
cannot direct the creation of posts. Creation and s anction of 
posts is a prerogative of the executive or legislat ive authorities 
and the Court cannot arrogate to itself this purely  executive or 
legislative function, and direct creation of posts in any 
organisation. It involves economic factors. Similar  view was held 
in the case of Maharashtra State Road Transport Cor poration 
(supra), wherein the Hon’ble Supreme Court held that creation of 
posts is not within the domain of judicial function s which 
obviously pertains to the executive and the status of permanency 
cannot be granted by the Court where no such posts exist and 
that executive functions and powers with regard to the creation 
of posts cannot be arrogated by the Courts, however , keeping 
posts temporary for long and denying the claims of the 
incumbents on the score that their posts are tempor ary makes 
no sense and strikes as arbitrary, especially when both 
temporary and permanent appointees are functionally  identified.

44  
If, in the normal course, a post is temporary in th e real sense 
and the appointee knows that his tenure cannot exce ed the post 
in longevity, there cannot be anything unfair or ca pricious in 
clothing him with no rights. Not so, if the post is , for certain 
departmental or like purposes, declared temporary, but it is 
within the ken of both the government and the appoi ntee that 
the temporary posts are virtually long-lives. It is  irrational to 
reject the claim of the 'temporary' appointee on no minal score of 
the terminology of the post. Of course, in view of the law laid 
down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of  Ajmer 
Vidhyut Vitaran Nigam Ltd. (supra),  the date from which 
regularization is to be granted is a matter to be d ecided by the 
employer keeping in view a number of factors like t he nature of 
the work, number of posts lying vacant, the financial condition of 
the employer, the additional financial burden cause d, the 
suitability of the workmen for the job, the manner and reason for 
which the initial appointments were made etc.  
12. Adverting to the contentions raised by the lear ned 
counsel for the respective parties, it is apparent that considering 
the necessity of workload and requirement of manpow er in the 
PEC of the University, the Programme Coordinator in  exercising 
his power under Rule 5.2 of 2001 Rules of the Unive rsity,

45  
engaged the petitioners in the PEC on daily wage ba sis for 
different period with the due approval of the Vice- Chancellor as 
per the said Rules and the engagement period was ex tended 
from time to time for each of the petitioners. The petitioners who 
were having requisite educational qualification wer e allowed to 
work as Office Assistants in the PEC. It is not in dispute that due 
procedure for selection was not followed at the tim e of 
engagement of the petitioners inasmuch as the vacan cies were 
not notified through the local Employment Exchange,  there was 
no advertisement and no competitive examination was  held and 
the engagement was also not made against any sancti oned post, 
but since the adoption of normal method of recruitm ent might 
have involved considerable delay resulting in failure to tackle the 
emergency, the engagement was made to meet emergent  
situation. Necessities non habet legem  is an old age maxim 
which means ‘necessity knows no law’. It cannot be said that the 
competent authority under 2001 Rules of the Univers ity 
committed any illegality in engaging the petitioner s on daily 
wage basis which were made at the time of necessity  with the 
approval of the Vice-Chancellor. The petitioners ar e discharging 
their duties since last two decades and the posts i nitially held by 
them were re-designated as ‘Junior Assistant’ on te mporary

46  
basis since long as per the resolution dated 16.05. 2015 of the 
Syndicate Committee of the University and office or der to that 
effect was issued on 16.07.2015. The University has  been 
utilizing the services of the petitioners and there  is nothing 
against their performance in duty. The continuance of the 
petitioners in service for such a long period was n ot with the 
benefit or protection of the interim order of any C ourt or 
Tribunal. When the request letter of the Registrar,  Sambalpur 
University dated 26.11.2015 to the Special Secretar y to Hon’ble 
Chancellor to accord necessary permission for regul arization of 
services of the petitioners and similar other emplo yees to enable 
the University to cope up with emerging situation a nd persistent 
demand of employees from different quarters was not  carried 
out and in the writ petitions filed by the petition ers before this 
Court, direction was issued to the State Govt. in H igher 
Education Department as per order dated 07.01.2016 to 
consider the recommendation made by the University and to 
pass appropriate order by sanctioning the post and to regularize 
the services of the petitioners taking into conside ration that they 
were continuing in service since long, the State Go vt. in the 
Department of Higher Education on 11.04.2018 intima ted the 
Registrar, Sambalpur University about filling up of  41 nos. of

47  
vacant posts of Junior Assistant as per OURP Rules,  1992. When 
the University has repeatedly requested the State i n the Higher 
Education Department by writing letters for accordi ng approval 
for regularization of the petitioners and others, t he sudden 
change of stand by the University in opposing the r egularization 
in the counter affidavit is strange and not expected from an ideal 
model employer and it amounts to exploit the servic es of the 
educated youth like the petitioners and others and to take 
advantage of their helplessness and misery.  
  Employment is not a tool in the hands of the 
employer to exploit the employed as it would lead t o unhealthy 
and deleterious practices and social injustice, con sequence of 
which is terrible in a democratic nation and may le ad to 
revolution. Financial security of employees rest in  the hands of 
their employers and harassment of employees in any form falls 
under exploitation. Exploitative employment in Univ ersities not 
only affects the employed, but it also flows on to the quality of 
education the students receive and academic excelle nce. The 
employees need to be treated with dignity and respe ct and fairly 
compensated for their works done.  
  When the petitioners have approached this Court b y 
filing writ petitions since 19.07.2019 challenging order of the

48  
Government of Odisha in rejecting their claim for r egularization 
of service in the posts of Junior Assistant in the University and 
they are relying on the resolution dated 16.05.2015  of the 
Syndicate Committee of the University and office or der issued to 
that effect on 16.07.2015 and orders were passed in  the 
respective writ petitions asking the learned State Counsel to 
obtain instruction and notices were issued to the opposite parties 
on 10.01.2020, the decision of the Syndicate in its  meeting 
dated 21.12.2021 in revoking the office order dated  16.07.2015 
is unfair and arbitrary and seems to be under the pressure of the 
opposite party no.1. At this stage, the petitioners  have become 
over-aged and they are not in a position to partici pate in the 
selection process even though they have got requisi te 
educational qualification for such post and moreove r they have 
got two decades of experience behind them. There is  no 
likelihood of any additional financial burden to th e State 
exchequer by absorbing the petitioners in the regular posts. 
In my humble view, the purpose and intent of the 
decision rendered in the case of Umadevi  (supra)  by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court has been misinterpreted and subsequen t 
decisions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court on this issu e have not 
been taken into account while considering the cases  of the

49  
petitioners for regularization and passing the impu gned order 
under Annexure-12 in rejecting their claim for regu larisation on 
the ground that they had not worked for more than t en years by 
10.04.2006 i.e. the date of decision in the case of  Umadevi  
(supra)  and the posts had not been sanctioned. The impugne d 
order is unreasonable, arbitrary and thus the concl usion can be 
corrected by a writ of certiorari. The University h as engaged the 
petitioners and allowed them to continue in service  voluntarily 
and continuously for more than two decades by now a nd the 
petitioners possess the prescribed qualifications f or the post of 
Junior Assistant and they are now working against t he 
sanctioned posts and have acquired vast experience as Junior 
Assistants and there is nothing against their fitne ss or capacity 
to hold such posts. In such a scenario, non-regularisation of their 
service against the available sanctioned posts is u nfair, 
unjustified and arbitrary.  
13.  In the final analysis, in the light of the for egoing 
discussions, the impugned order dated 31.05.2019 pa ssed by 
the Government of Odisha in the Department of Highe r 
Education, Odisha under Annexure-12 in rejecting th e claim of 
the petitioners for regularization in the posts of Junior Assistant 
in Sambalpur University cannot be sustained in the eye of law

50  
and is hereby set aside. The opposite parties shall  pass 
appropriate order for regularisation of services of  the petitioners 
against the posts of Junior Assistant as expeditiou sly as possible 
preferably within a period of three months from the  date of 
receipt of a copy of this judgment.  
Resultantly, all the writ petitions are allowed. 
In the circumstances, there will no order as to costs. 
       ........................                             
                                 S.K. Sahoo, J. 
      
Orissa High Court, Cuttack 
The 1st June 2023/PKSahoo/Pravakar