Page 1 of 6 
 
 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK 
 
ITA No.62 of 2022  
(Through Hybrid mode) 
     
Peoples Forum …. Appellant  
 
 
 
 
-versus- 
 
 
Commissioner of Income Tax  …. Respondent  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Learned advocates appeared in this case:  
 
For petitioner     :   Mr. Chitrasen Parida, Advocate 
     
 
For opposite party :  Mr. Radheshyam Chimanka, Advocate 
    (Senior Standing Counsel, I.T)  
     
  
 
 
CORAM:  
 
JUSTICE ARINDAM SINHA 
JUSTICE G. SATAPATHY 
                                                    
 
 
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  Dates of hearing  : 01.08.2023 
  Date of judgment : 04.08.2023 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
                       
1.  Appellant (assessee) seeks to prefer this appeal ag ainst order 
dated 15 th  June, 2022 in ITA no.44/CTK/2021 for assessment ye ar 
2016-17, made by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (ITAT), 
Cuttack Bench.

// 2 // 
 
ITA no.62 of 2022              Page 2 of 6 
 
2.  Mr. Parida, learned advocate appears on behalf of 
appellant(assessee). He submits, without minimum inquiry and on the 
eve of expiry of the period of limitation, the Comm issioner interfered 
with the assessment under section 263 in Income Tax  Act, 1961. His 
client preferred appeal to the Tribunal but by impu gned order dated 
15 th  June, 2022, the Tribunal upheld the revision order . He draws 
attention to definition of ‘anonymous donation’, gi ven in section 
2(24)(iia) and submits, sub-section (3) in section 115-BBC requires 
the assessee to maintain record of identity indicat ing name and 
address of the donors and such other particulars as may be prescribed. 
There has not been any further prescription. He dem onstrates from 
reply dated 27 th  March, 2021 given by his client, as had enclosed 
therewith detailed list of donors along with comple te addresses and 
amount of donations. In the circumstances, it canno t be said the 
Assessing Officer (AO) did not verify, leading to finding of erroneous 
assessment requiring revision.  
3.  Mr. Chimanka, learned advocate, Senior Standing Cou nsel 
appears on behalf of respondent (revenue) and draws  attention to 
revision order dated 30 
th  March, 2021, paragraph 9. He relies upon a 
passage therein, reproduced below.

// 3 // 
 
ITA no.62 of 2022              Page 3 of 6 
 
“9. During the review of assessment considering the  
assessee’s reply by the commissioner, the following  
things were observed; 
 As per the Receipt & Payment account for the year 
ending 31.03.2016, as well as Balance Sheet as at 
31.03.2016, the assessee has received donation for 
corpus fund of Rs.3,45,60,000/-. In respect of said  
donation, the AO has not verified the relationship 
between donors and trust, credit worthiness of 
donors, date and mode of payment of donation and 
genuineness of donation etc . during the course of 
scrutiny assessment. Hence, the donation of 
Rs.3,45,60,000/- is required to be treated as 
anonymous donation and taxable at the rate of 30% 
u/s 115BBC in accordance with the provisions of 
law.”   
 xxx  xxx  xxx  
(emphasis supplied) 
He submits further, the Commissioner also relied on  section 13(7) to 
hold that anonymous donation is not eligible for de duction under 
sections 11 and 12.  
4.  We admit the appeal on the substantial question of law as 
below.

// 4 // 
 
ITA no.62 of 2022              Page 4 of 6 
 
 Where the AO has not verified relationship between donors 
and the trust, credit worthiness of donors, date or  mode of 
payment of donation and genuineness of donation etc ., is the 
assessment erroneous on it being prejudicial to the  interest of 
revenue, requiring interference in revision under section 263? 
5. We have not been shown that there has been furth er 
prescription regarding recipients of donation to ma intain record of 
further particulars in addition to identity, name a nd address of the 
person making the contribution, as provided under s ub-section (3) of 
section 115-BBC. Section 2(24)(iia) gives definitio n of anonymous 
donation. Appellant (assessee) must first be shown to have received 
anonymous donation.  
6. We have perused the assessment order and found t he AO said, 
inter alia, as reproduced below.  
“During the course of assessment proceedings the 
assessee produced the relevant documents as per 
questionnaire through e-proceeding. The Books of 
account including bank statements, audit report, 
statement of income and the ledgers furnished for 
verification were examined . Considering the 
submissions made and after verification of the 
documents submitted by the assessee the total incom e

// 5 // 
 
ITA no.62 of 2022              Page 5 of 6 
 
of the assessee trust is hereby accepted. According ly, 
the total income of the assessee is determined at R s. 
Nil.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
As aforesaid, the Commissioner in the revision orde r had reproduced 
assessee’s reply to the show-cause notice, where in  paragraph 3.2 the 
assessee said it had again enclosed therewith, deta iled list of donors 
along with their complete address and amounts of do nations given by 
them as annexure-1. The paragraph is reproduced below.  
“3.2. That thereafter the Ld. Assessing Officer 
complied all the details filed by the assessee with  the 
books of account and other documents impounded 
which were found to be in order, therefore did not 
make any additions or did not treated the corpus 
donations as anonymous donation and passed the 
assessment order u/s. 143(3) by accepting the 
returned income. For your kind perusal again 
herewith we are enclosing the detailed list of the 
donor along with their complete address and the 
amount of donations given by them as  Annexure-1” 
(emphasis supplied) 
The Commissioner went on to only say, the assessee’ s reply had been 
considered but not found tenable. In the circumstan ces, we did not 
find a dispute regarding disclosure of identity of donors, their

// 6 // 
 
ITA no.62 of 2022              Page 6 of 6 
 
addresses and the amount of donations they had made  to the assessee. 
This fact is sufficient for compliance of requireme nt under section 
115-BBC(3), in claiming exemption of the donations from being 
chargeable to income tax.  
7. Facts found by the Commissioner and the Tribunal  clearly 
show that the assessee had furnished record of the identities indicating 
name and address of persons making the contribution s. Revenue has 
not been able to demonstrate further requirement by  prescribed 
particulars, as mentioned under sub-section (3) in section 115-BBC. 
As such, we answer the question in the negative and  in favour of 
appellant (assessee). 
8. The appeal is allowed. The orders of Tribunal an d the 
Commissioner are set aside and quashed.   
5.     
                                                               
( Arindam Sinha ) 
Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
( G. Satapathy ) 
Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prasant