IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK 
                    WPC(OA) No. 399 of 2014  
 
Srikanta Nayak   …..…     Petitioner  
                                             -versus- 
State of Odisha & others  …..…                   Opp. Parties  
 
 
 
 For  Petitioner     :   Mr. M. Pratap, Advocate                                
   
                                                       
                                              
       For Opp.parties  :  Mr. B.P.Tripathy, AGA along  
                              with Mr. Nikhil Prata p,  
                                               Addl. Standing Counsel   
   
 
 
                                               ------------------ 
 
P R E S E N T:  
 THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE M.S. SAHOO 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
 
Date of hearing : 03.07.2023 Date of judgment : 03.07.2023                         
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
 
              M.S.SAHOO, J   The writ petition has been registered before this C ourt on 
16.08.2021 upon abolition of the Odisha Administrat ive Tribunal, 
Principal Bench, Bhubaneswar. 
  Brief Facts  
               2.  The Original Application was filed by the petition er working as 
Senior Assistant in the office of the Engineer-in-C hief, Public Health, 
Odisha, Bhubaneswar with the following prayers : 
                “(i) the Hon’ble Tribunal graciously be pleased to q uash the 
Reversion Order dt.07.02.2014, Annexure-5, with all  
consequential service and financial benefits; 
 (ii) further be pleased to pass any other order(s) /direction(s) 
as deems fit and proper in the facts and circumstan ces of 
the case.”  
  3.  On perusal of the available order-sheets of the le arned 
Tribunal it is indicated that the notices were issu ed by order dated 
14.02.2012 with the following interim order :

// 2 // 
 
Page 2 of 9 
 
  “So far as the prayer for interim relief is concer ned, it is 
directed that the impugned reversion order dated 07 .02.2014 
at Annexure-8 shall be subject to final out come of  this original 
application and in case of ultimate success of the applicant in 
this case, he would be entitled to get all service benefits, as if 
order dated 7.2.2014 had not been passed.” 
  Thereafter, the matter was listed on 08.12.2015 a nd 
14.01.2016 but never listed thereafter. By this Cou rt’s order dated 
13.03.2023 learned counsel for the petitioner was d irected to obtain 
up-to-date instruction regarding the present status  of the services of 
the petitioner under the Government. 
  Learned counsel for the State was also on several  occasions 
granted time to obtain instruction. 
  Submissions  
 4.  It is submitted by the learned counsel for the pet itioner that 
he has no up-to-date instruction regarding the pres ent status of the 
services of the petitioner under the Government.  B ut submits that 
since no counter has been filed, the prayer of the petitioner in the 
petition filed before the learned Tribunal ultimate ly transferred to 
this Court, should be granted. 
  It is contended by the learned counsel for the pe titioner that 
by order dated 13.03.2013 the petitioner was given promotion, 
therefore, could not   have been reverted before the completion. 
  Analysis  
  5. Essentially, the challenge in the petition is to t he order dated 
07.02.2014 (Annexure-8) by which the petitioner whi le continuing 
on probation in the promotional post of senior Assi stant after being 
granted promotion on probation for one year by orde r dated 
13.03.2013, was reverted to his former post, i.e., Junior Assistant as 
his work and conduct was not found to be satisfacto ry during the 
probation period in the promotional post.  Such ord er of reversion 
was as per paragraph-19 (2) of the G.A. Department Notification 
No.7417 dated 11.04.1994, published in the Orissa G azette on the 
23 
rd  May, 1994.

// 3 // 
 
Page 3 of 9 
 
6. The G.A. Department  Notification  notified the O rissa 
Ministerial Services (Method of Recruitment and Con ditions of 
Service of Assistants and Section Officers in the o ffices of the Heads 
of Departments) Rules, 1994. The Rule 1994 provides as follows : 
Constitution 
and 
composition 
of the cadre. 
 
3. (1) The service shall consist of the 
following grades, namely :-  
(a) Junior Assistant;  
(b) Senior Assistant;  
(c) Section Officer, Level – II; 
(d) Section Officer, Level – I.  
    xx                             xx                       xx 
           Probation.   19. (1) All persons appointed to a post in the 
service shall be on probation for a period of 
two years in case of direct recruitment and 
one year in case of promotion which shall be 
counted from the date of joining the post  ;  
     Provided that the period of probation 
shall not include the following :-  
      (a) Extra-ordinary leave,  
      (b) Period of unauthorized leave,  
      (c) Any other period held to be not being 
on actual duty.  
     (2) The appointing authority may extend 
the period of probation or terminate the 
services of a person appointed on probation 
(in case of the direct recruit) or revert a 
person to his previous post (in case of a 
promote) during or at the end of his period of 
probation, if the work and conduct of such 
person is not found to be satisfactory.  
      (3) The date of completion of the period 
of probation in each case shall be notified by 
an office order and shall also be recorded in 
the Service Book.”   
                                   [Emphasis Supplied] 
 In considered opinion of this Court,  Rule 19(2) of the 1994 
Rules does provide that the period of probation in the promotional 
post may be terminated before completion of the per iod of probation 
if the work and conduct of such person is not found  to be 
satisfactory.  Rule 19(3) also provides completion of period of

// 4 // 
 
Page 4 of 9 
 
probation shall be notified by office order and has  to be recorded in 
the service book. 
 7.  The relevant portion of the order dated 13.03.2013  granting 
promotion on probation is reproduced for reference : 
  “….Now, therefore, after careful consideration Sri  Srikanta 
Nayak, Jr. Asst. is hereby promoted to the rank of Sr.Asst. 
with the date of his joining in the scale of pay Rs .9300-
34800/- with GP 4200/- against existing vacancy as per 
recommendation of DPC held on 24.03.2011. 
   The position of Sri Srikanta Nayak, Sr. Asst. is  placed below 
the Sri S.S. Nayak, Sr. Asst & above Sri Tusar Kanta Sahu, Sr. 
Assistant. 
  The above promotion shall be on probation for a p eriod of one 
year from the date of his joining in the said post .” 
  It is not disputed that in terms of Rule 19 of th e 1994 Rules 
the promotion of the petitioner was on probation fo r a period of  
one year from the date of joining of the petitioner , i.e.,  
24.03.2011 and the period of probation would have e nded on 
23.03.2012. 
 8. As is evident from the pleadings in the petition        
(Annexure-5), a disciplinary proceeding against the  petitioner was 
initiated in the form of inquiry against the petiti oner under            
Rule-15 of the OCS (CCA) Rules, 1962 on the ground of (i) 
unauthorized absence from the Government duties, (i i) 
misconduct and (iii) negligence of the Government duty. 
  It has not been indicated in the present petition  as to 
whether the disciplinary proceeding has been comple ted or the 
same has been challenged by the petitioner or the p etitioner has 
been exonerated from the charges alleged in the sai d disciplinary 
proceeding. 
         Since the initiation of the D.P. is not a subject matter of the 
petition, this Court is not a position  to deal wit h the same. But it 
is referred to in view of the averments made in the  petition.

// 5 // 
 
Page 5 of 9 
 
9.  The Hon’ble Supreme Court dealt with similar issue of 
premature termination on probation  in Ram Narain Yadav v. 
State of Haryana, 1993 Supp (2) SCC 732 : 1993 SCC (L&S) 
895 : (1993) 24 ATC 831 at page 733 .  The relevant 
paragraphs of the said decision are quoted herein : 
 “2.  The appellant was holding the post of Secretary to  the 
Speaker in the rank of Under Secretary. On the 15th  of 
January, 1991 he was promoted as the Deputy Secreta ry 
to the Legislative Assembly and put on probation fo r a 
period of one year. On the 8th of November, 1991, t he 
Speaker passed an order under Rule 10(2)(b)(i) of t he 
Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat Service Rules, 198 1 
reverting him as an Under Secretary.  This order was 
challenged before the High Court on the ground of m ala 
fides. By the impugned judgment, the High Court has  
dismissed the application. 
3.  Mr P.P. Rao, the learned counsel for the appellant  has 
contended that since there was no warning given to the 
appellant earlier about the allegedly poor quality of his 
work and as the order of termination of his service s came 
all of a sudden, the same is illegal in view of the  
observations made in paragraph 4 of the judgment in  Dr 
Sumati P. Shere (Mrs) v. Union of India [(1989) 3 S CC 311 :  
1989 SCC (L&S) 471 : (1989) 11 ATC 127] . It is als o 
contended that a perusal of the order of reversion of the 
appellant indicates that till further orders were l ater 
passed he was to continue to perform the same work 
which he was doing earlier. If that was the positio n, the 
argument is, it was not a proper exercise of the au thority 
under Rule 10 in terminating the period of promotio n 
(sic probation) prematurely and reverting the appel lant to 
Under Secretary rank.  Lastly, it has been stated that in 
any event the appellant is entitled to his salary o n the 
scale as admissible to a Deputy Secretary on the gr ound 
that he was discharging the same functions. 
4.  Mr Sibal, the learned counsel on behalf of the 
respondents has opposed the application mainly on t he 
ground that it was for the authorities to consider the 
satisfactory nature of the services discharged by t he 
appellant during the probation period and if his wo rk was 
found unsatisfactory after 10 months, it was open t o them 
to have terminated the probation.  With respect to the 
aspect that the appellant was allowed to discharge the 
same function even later, it was explained by Mr Sibal that

// 6 // 
 
Page 6 of 9 
 
since he was assigned the duty of dealing with the 
committee of public accounts and since the financia l year 
was coming to a close, it was not practicable to en trust the 
work to another person immediately, and, therefore,  
although his work was not found satisfactory he was  
allowed to work. Having regard to all the facts and  
circumstances of the case, we are of the view that no 
interference in the present matter is expedient exc ept 
issuing a direction to the respondents to pay the a ppellant 
his emoluments on the same scale as he was entitled  to 
while holding the rank of Deputy Secretary of Legis lative 
Assembly till he was relieved of that post. It appe ars from 
the records that he functioned up to the 7th May an d was 
relieved from his duty from the 8th of May. The app eal is, 
therefore, dismissed subject  to the aforesaid direction 
about the payment of the further amount by way of 
emoluments. The amount which has already been paid to 
him, however, shall be adjusted. The appeal is disp osed 
of, but there will be no orders as to costs. 
10. Hon’ble Supreme Court has dealt with the issue of 
termination of service during probation in Pavanendra Narayan 
Verma v. Sanjay Gandhi PGI of Medical Sciences , (2002) 1 
SCC 520 : 2002 SCC (L&S) 170 : 2001 SCC OnLine SC 1322 at 
page 524 .  The relevant paragraphs thereof are quoted herein : 
 “8.  Since the decision in Parshotam Lal Dhingra v. Uni on 
of India [AIR 1958 SC 36] courts have had to perfor m a 
balancing act between denying a probationer any rig ht to 
continue in service while at the same time granting him the 
right to challenge the termination of his service w hen the 
termination is by way of punishment.  The law has 
developed along apparently illogical lines in deter mining 
when the termination of a temporary appointee or 
probationer's services amounts to punishment. 
9.  In 1974, Krishna Iyer, J. had said: 
         “The need, in this branch of jurisprudence , is not so 
much to reach perfect justice but to lay down a pla in test 
which the administrator and civil servant can under stand 
without subtlety and apply without difficulty.” [Sa msher 
Singh v. State of Punjab, (1974) 2 SCC 831 : 1974 S CC 
(L&S) 550] (SCC p. 889, para 161) 
10.  Since “Dhingra [AIR 1958 SC 36] is the Magna Carta of 
the Indian civil servant, although it has spawned d iverse

// 7 // 
 
Page 7 of 9 
 
judicial trends, difficult to be disciplined into o ne single, 
simple, practical formula applicable to termination  of 
probation of freshers and of the services of tempor ary 
employees”  [Samsher Singh v. State of Punjab, supra at p. 
887, para 158] , we have thought it best to refer t o the 
facts of Dhingra case [AIR 1958 SC 36] to understan d 
what exactly was meant when the Court said: (AIR p.  49, 
para 82) 
         “It is true that the misconduct, negligenc e, 
inefficiency or other disqualification may be the m otive or 
the inducing factor which influences the Government  to 
take action under the terms of the contract of empl oyment 
or the specific service rule,  nevertheless, if a right exists, 
under the contract or the rules, to terminate the s ervice the 
motive operating on the mind of the Government is, as 
Chagla, C.J., has said in Shrinivas Ganesh v. Union  of 
India [AIR 1956 Bom 455 : 58 Bom LR 673] , wholly 
irrelevant. In short, if the termination of service  is founded 
on the right flowing from contract or the service r ules then 
prima facie, the termination is not a punishment an d 
carries with it no evil consequences and so Article  311 is 
not attracted.  But even if the Government has, by contract 
or under the rules, the right to terminate the empl oyment 
without going through the procedure prescribed for 
inflicting the punishment of dismissal or removal o r 
reduction in rank, the Government may, nevertheless , 
choose to punish the servant and if the termination  of 
service is sought to be founded on misconduct, negl igence, 
inefficiency or other disqualification, then it is a 
punishment and the requirements of Article 311 must  be 
complied with.” 
11.  In that case the employee had been reverted back from 
an officiating post. The records showed that advers e 
remarks had been made against the employee in his 
confidential reports while he was officiating. Thes e 
remarks were placed before the General Manager who 
said that he was “disappointed” to read them and th at he 
should be reverted as a subordinate “till he makes good 
the shortcomings noticed …”. The order of reversion  was 
passed by the General Manager soon after this. When  the 
issue ultimately came before this Court, this Court  upheld 
the order of reversion , saying: (AIR p. 50, para 29) 
         “He had no right to continue in that post and under 
the general law the implied term of such appointmen t was 
that it was terminable at any time on reasonable no tice by 
the Government and, therefore, his reduction did no t 
operate as a forfeiture of any right and could not be

// 8 // 
 
Page 8 of 9 
 
described as reduction in rank by way of punishment . Nor 
did this reduction under Note 1 to Rule 1702 amount  to his 
dismissal or removal. Further it is quite clear fro m the 
orders passed by the General Manager that it did no t 
entail the forfeiture of his chances of future prom otion or 
affect his seniority in his substantive post. In th ese 
circumstances, there is no escape from the conclusi on that 
the petitioner was not reduced in rank by way of 
punishment and, therefore, the provisions of Articl e 311(2) 
do not come into play at all.” 
        Conclusion  
               11.   In view of the fact that the petitioner was under  probation for 
a period of one year in the promotional post before  completion of 
one year, no right accrued in favour of the petitio ner to continue 
in promotional post on probation beyond a period of  one year as 
provided in Rule-19(2) of the 1994 Rules. As the pe riod of one 
year has been completed and no further order has be en passed by 
the authority, the prayer to continue on probation beyond 
23.03.2012, i.e., the date of completion of one yea r cannot be 
granted. 
 Applying the principle laid in Ram Narain Yadav (supra)  as 
well as Pavanendra Narayan Verma  (supra)  it has to be held 
that the period of probation in a promotional post can be 
prematurely terminated if the Rule provides and in the present 
case, Rule 19(2) does provide termination of the pr obation in the 
promotional post. In case of in service promotion, the period of 
probation is prescribed in the Rules, to be one yea r and it can be 
terminated before one year.  As held in Pavanendra Narayan 
Verma  (supra),  such termination is founded on the service rules 
i.e. 1994 Rules in the case at hand and it is not a  punishment 
and does not carry any evil consequence so as to at tract Article 
311.  Further the order as at Annexure-8 dated 7.2. 2014 
terminating probation in promotional post and rever ting the 
petitioner to his post as held before promotion, di d not operate as 
a forfeiture of his chances of future promotion or affect his 
seniority in his substantive post.

// 9 // 
 
Page 9 of 9 
 
  Therefore, the prayer made in the petition in the  present 
form is untenable since the petitioner seeks contin uation of his 
probation in the promotional post on probation beyo nd one 
year.  Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed being devoid of 
any merit. 
 12. Before parting with the case, it is clarified that  since the 
present status of the disciplinary proceeding is no t known and it  
is not known whether the petitioner ever challenged  the same 
being aggrieved in any manner, the order in the pre sent petition 
shall not be in any manner be prejudicial to the pe titioner’s 
contention, if any such challenge is laid by the petitioner. 
                 
        …………………… 
          M.S.Sahoo, J. 
 
 
Orissa High Court, Cuttack 
The 3
rd  July,2023/dutta