CRLMC No. 754 of 2022                                                     Page 1 of 8 
             
    IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK  
  
CRLMC No. 754   of   20 22   
   
Manoranjan Dash @ Manoranjan 
Das  
….  Petitioner  
Mr. S.K. Sarangi,  Senior  Advocate  
 
 
-Versus - 
 
 
State of Odisha  & Another  ….  Opposite Part ies  
Mr. S. S. Mohapatra, Additional Standing Counsel   
Mr. Aurobindo Mohanty, Advocate for O.P. No.2  
                            
         CORAM:  
                            JUSTICE  R.K. PATTANAIK  
                                 
  DATE OF JUDGMENT :03 .07.202 3 
 
 
1.  The petitioner has filed the instant petition under  Section 482 
Cr.P.C. for quashment of the criminal proceeding in  connection 
with C.T. Case No. 864 of 2022 pending in the file of learned 
S.D.J.M., Bhubaneswar corresponding to Laxmisagar P .S. Case 
No. 62 dated 9 th  February, 2022 on the ground that the 
allegations against him are out rightly false.  
2.  In fact, opposite party No.2 filed a complaint in 1  C.C. Case 
No. 786 of 2022 for a direction from the court of l earned 
S.D.J.M., Bhubaneswar under Section 156(3) of the C r.P.C. to the 
local P.S. to enquire into the allegations made the rein and to take 
action against the petitioner according to law, lat er to which, 
Laxmisagar P.S. Case No. 62 was registered on 9 th  February, 2022 
under Sections 417, 420, 376, 354 and 506 IPC. As p er the 
complaint, opposite party No.2 is a working lady an d having 
matrimonial dispute with her husband since past fiv e years, 
whereas, the petitioner is working in the BDA and b oth of them 
have had a friendship since seven years before its filling. It has 
been alleged in the F.I.R. (Annexure-1) treated so after receiving

Manoranjan Dash @ Manoranjan Das Vrs. State of Odisha & Another 
            CRLMC No. 754 of 2022                                                    Page 2 of 8 
 
the complaint that the petitioner subjected the com plainant to 
mental harassment, torture and blackmailed her and also falsely 
promised her to marry after settlement of the matri monial 
dispute. The further allegation in Annexure-1 is th at the petitioner 
always demanded money from the informant and she fi nding no 
alternative, had to part with Rs.7,00,000/- (rupees seven lakh) on 
different occasions along with other valuables. The  other mischief 
and overt acts committed by the petitioner have bee n described 
therein. After Laxmisagar P.S. Case No. 62 was regi stered, the 
petitioner has approached this Court challenging th e initiation of 
the criminal action pending before the learned Cour t below in 
connection with C.T. Case No. 864 of 2022. 
3.  Heard Mr. Sarangi, learned Senior Advocate appearin g for the 
petitioner and Mr. Mohapatra, learned counsel for t he State 
besides Mr. Mohanty, learned counsel for opposite party No.2.   
4.  Mr. Sarangi, learned Senior Advocate appearing on b ehalf of 
the petitioner submits that the allegations against  the petitioner 
are false and fabricated, inasmuch as, there has be en no any 
harassment caused to opposite party No.2 and the parties were in 
a relationship and when the marriage between them d id not 
materialize as the former allegedly distanced himse lf from the 
latter, the complaint was filed and thereafter, the  case was 
registered under various offences including Section  376 IPC which 
is not maintainable. By referring to an order of th e Apex Court 
dated 27 th  July, 2022 in Mandar Deepak Pawar Vr s. State of 
Maharashtra & Another (Criminal Appeal No. 442 of 2 022)  and 
the following decisions reported in 2020 (78) OCR 718 ; 2019(9) 
SCC 608 ; AIR 2021 SC 1405 ; 2010(1) SCC 108  and AIR 1992 SC 
604 , it has been contended by Mr. Sarangi for the peti tioner that 
an offence under Section 376 IPC is not at all made  out 
considering the fact that both the parties had been in a committed

Manoranjan Dash @ Manoranjan Das Vrs. State of Odisha & Another 
            CRLMC No. 754 of 2022                                                    Page 3 of 8 
 
relationship. Furthermore, Mr. Sarangi by placing r eliance on the 
decisions reported in 2006 (Supp II) OLR 856 ; 2007(2) OLR SC 
608  and 2016  (2) OLR 668  would submit that even the offence 
under Section 420 I.P.C is not made out since it is  necessary to 
prove deception from the very inception with refere nce to the 
monetary transactions. It is, therefore, contended that the 
criminal proceeding at the behest of opposite party  No.2, in view 
of the nature of allegations in Annexure-1 and the fact that the 
parties were in a relationship for about seven year s, would be an 
abuse of process of court and hence, it is liable t o be quashed in 
exercise of the inherent jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C.  
5.  Mr. Mohapatra, learned counsel for the State opposi te party 
No.1 submits that only a case has been registered a nd currently 
investigation is in progress and having regard to t he seriousness in 
the allegations made, as revealed from Annexure-1, the criminal 
proceeding  pending in the file of the learned cour t below should 
not be quashed at the threshold.   
6. Mr. Mohanty, learned counsel for opposite party N o.2 
supported the above contention of the State and fur ther 
submitted that opposite party No.2 was already in m ental agony 
due to her matrimonial dispute, taking advantage of  which, the 
petitioner perpetuated the alleged mischief and had  also agreed 
to marry her but since by that time, it was not acc eptable to her, 
the ill-treatment and threat was administered being  vindictive. It 
has been claimed that opposite party No.2 since was  blackmailed 
by the petitioner, she agreed to marry the latter a fter her 
matrimonial dispute is settled, however, lastly the re was an 
agreement between the parties on 4 th  February, 2021 with an 
understanding that the marriage between them would be held 
after disposal of C.P. Nos. 41 and 70 of 2019 pendi ng before the 
Family Court, Bhubaneswar by referring to the objec tion dated

Manoranjan Dash @ Manoranjan Das Vrs. State of Odisha & Another 
            CRLMC No. 754 of 2022                                                    Page 4 of 8 
 
31 st  March, 2023 and the mutual agreement as at Annexur e-A 
appended thereto. Mr. Mohanty also submitted that u nder 
pressing circumstances, the petitioner extracted mo ney from 
opposite party No.2 on different dates including an  amount of 
Rs. 50,000/- by cheating to obtain an approved plan  of a 
building from the BDA. It is contended by Mr. Mohan ty that no 
case is made out for exercise of jurisdiction under  482 Cr.P.C. 
since a prima facie case is proved against the petitioner. According 
to Mr. Mohanty, as the allegations set out in the c omplaint 
constitute offences of cognizable nature, in absenc e of any 
malafide, the contention of the petitioner for quas hment of the 
criminal proceeding sans merit. While advancing suc h an 
argument, Mr. Mohanty cited the following decisions , such as, 
Ramesh Chandra Gupta Vrs. State of U.P.  2022 Live Law (SC) -
993 ; Veena Mittal Vrs. State of U.P.  2022 Live Law (SC) 110 ; 1992 
Suppl. 1 SCC 225  and State of Bihar Vrs. Murad A li Khan & Others  
(1988) 4 SCC 1 by concluding that the criminal action against the  
petitioner calls for no interference.   
7. No doubt, in case of a consensual relationship fo r a 
considerable period with the wealth of wisdom, if t he parties 
maintained physical relationship given on an assura nce of 
marriage to the victim which for some reason or the  other failed 
to materialize later, any such allegation of rape w ith a claim that 
the promise has been broken, it has been held by th e Apex Court 
in Pramod Suryav an  Pawar (supra) that such a case is not made 
out, referring to which, the appeal filed by the ac cused in Mandar 
Deepak Pawar  (supra) was allowed and the proceeding was set 
aside. There is a subtle difference between breach of promise 
which is made in good faith but subsequently could not be 
fulfilled and a false promise to marriage. In the f ormer case, for 
any such sexual intimacy, an offence under Section 376 IPC is not 
made out, whereas, in the latter, it is, since the same is based on

Manoranjan Dash @ Manoranjan Das Vrs. State of Odisha & Another 
            CRLMC No. 754 of 2022                                                    Page 5 of 8 
 
the premise that the promise to marriage was false or fake from 
the very beginning, which is given on the understan ding by the 
accused that it would be broken finally. Whether, t here was 
merely a breach of promise or any kind of mischief committed by 
the accused after offering a false promise is a mat ter of fact. If 
ultimately from the F.I.R. and material evidence, i t is made to 
suggest that there was no genuine promise from the side of the 
accused or a false one was offered in order to indu ce the victim 
or to obtain her consent to maintain sexual relatio nship, it would 
be an act in bad faith and in that case, an offence  under Section 
376 IPC may be made out but such is not the case wh ere after a 
long relationship, it is broken and there has been a breach of 
promise for certain reasons. So therefore, in case of a relationship 
whether it was consensual or otherwise for the purp ose of an 
offence under Section 376 I.P.C would depend on the  nature of 
accusation and conduct of the parties and in partic ular, of the 
accused.  
8.  In so far as the present case is concerned, the re lation between 
the parties has definitely been an unpleasant one i f the complaint 
and other materials are gone through. If the object ion dated 31 st  
March, 20222 of opposite party No.2 is perused, it is made to 
suggest that the petitioner had disclosed his desir e to marry her to 
which she was not prepared by then but after being threatened to 
viral their photographs, she agreed but only after the matrimonial 
disputes are over. It is also pleaded therein that the petitioner 
later on, even after an agreement dated 4 th  February, 2021, 
avoided and denied to marry her. It is further made  to appear 
that opposite party No.2 parted with good amount of  money 
paid to the petitioner claimed to be under compulsi on. It is 
alleged by opposite party No.2 that the petitioner did not 
respond on and from 16 th  January, 2022 and even declared not 
to marry her. In fact, number of allegations of ill -treatment has

Manoranjan Dash @ Manoranjan Das Vrs. State of Odisha & Another 
            CRLMC No. 754 of 2022                                                    Page 6 of 8 
 
been made against the petitioner, if the complaint is read as a 
whole. Is it that under compelling circumstances op posite party 
No.2 had to maintain the relationship or she was a consenting 
party to it all along? If there was an agreement be tween the 
parties for marriage, why it failed to materialize?  What prevailed 
upon the petitioner, whether, it was on genuine gro und not to 
marry opposite party No.2 though initially he had a greed? While 
considering it, one has to be conscious of the kind  of relationship 
between the parties which has been on and off for w hatever 
reasons. Whether the parties involved themselves in nocently and 
maintained relationship which apparently had a bitt er end? To 
straightaway allege sexual misconduct for the marri age not being 
materialized even with the denial of the petitioner  may not be 
fully justified, if the alleged relationship starte d genuinely but 
deteriorated thereafter. The ill-treatment during t he subsistence of 
a relationship cannot always be a reason to suspect  the intention 
of the male partner. Nonetheless, it depends on the  nature of 
accusation, kind of relationship maintained and rea son to fell 
apart with the marriage not taking place to determi ne the 
intention of the accused alleged of sexual mischief . All such 
aspects are to be sincerely examined before conclud ing that an 
offence of rape is committed especially when partie s are major, 
educated and well off besides financially independe nt and fully 
competent to understand and realise the consequence s of a 
relationship. Without commenting upon the veracity of the 
allegations, it may not be lost sight of the fact t hat opposite party 
No.2 appears to have entered into a relationship wh ich was built 
upon a friendship at a time when she was not yet di vorced. But, 
it may not be a ground either to completely dismiss the complaint 
as other allegations have been made therein against  the 
petitioner. What the Court is concerned with is tha t a sour 
relationship, if initially started and developed ge nuinely with a

Manoranjan Dash @ Manoranjan Das Vrs. State of Odisha & Another 
            CRLMC No. 754 of 2022                                                    Page 7 of 8 
 
friendship should not always be branded as a produc t of mistrust 
and mischief thereby accusing the male partner of r ape. The 
Court, considering the complaint and other material s is of the 
view that the entire story unfolded revealed existe nce of 
friendship and thereafter, a relationship which was  developed 
under the circumstances narrated and during the initial period, the 
petitioner was inclined to marry opposite party No. 2 to which 
she agreed later and even a settlement was reached at on 4 th  
February, 2021. Thus, therefore, it may be said tha t a promise by 
the petitioner was broken though he had the initial  interest and 
inclination to marry opposite party No.2, who for c ertain reasons 
was not ready for it at that point in time. It is a lleged that under 
threat or compulsion, opposite party No.2 agreed fo r the 
marriage after she was blackmailed by the petitione r. 
Interestingly, opposite party No.2 agreed later and  even entered 
into a written agreement with the petitioner in 202 1. It indicates 
that the parties had a difficult time in dealing wi th each other and 
managing their relationship which finally worsened leading to 
separation. From the conduct of both the parties as  made to 
suggest considering the complaint and pleadings, it  would not be 
just and proper to allege sexual mischief against t he petitioner, 
who for reasons unknown declined to marry opposite party 
No.2. As earlier stated, the parties are educated a nd well placed 
and were quite aware of the consequences and still engaged 
themselves in a relationship which remotely appear to be one 
sided and having understood the kind of relationshi p it was 
developed and had become later on, the Court, keepi ng in view 
the settled position of law, which are referred to herein before, 
reaches at a conclusion that it would not be justif ied to allege 
rape against the petitioner, But, in so far as othe r allegations are 
concerned, it should be left open for enquiry and i nvestigation.

Manoranjan Dash @ Manoranjan Das Vrs. State of Odisha & Another 
            CRLMC No. 754 of 2022                                                    Page 8 of 8 
 
With the above conclusion, the Court holds that it needs to 
interfere only to the extent aforesaid. 
9. Accordingly, it ordered. 
10. In the result, the petition stands partly allowed . As necessary 
corollary, the registration of Laxmisagar  P.S. Case No. 62 dated 
9th February, 2022 for an offence under Section 376  IPC 
corresponding to C.T. Case No. 864 of 2022 pending in the file 
of learned S.D.J.M., Bhubaneswar is hereby quashed vis-à-vis the 
petitioner for the reasons discussed but not for the remainder.             
 
       (R.K. Pattanaik)  
            Judge  
              
     Balaram