Page 1 of 8 
JCRLA No.28 of 2017 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK 
JCRLA No.28 of 2017 
In the matter of an Appeal under section 383 of the  Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 and from the judgment of conviction  and order of 
sentence dated 28 th  May, 2016 passed by the learned Additional 
Sessions Judge, Nabarangpur  in C.T. No.10 of 2016(T). 
---- 
Rabi Jani  …          Appellant 
 
-versus- 
State of Orissa  … Respondent 
Appeared in this case by Hybrid Arrangement 
(Virtual/Physical Mode): 
 For Appellant - Mr.Pulakesh Mohanty, 
     Advocate 
 For Respondent  -  Mr.S.S. Kanungo 
     Addl. Government Advocate 
CORAM: 
MR. JUSTICE D.DASH 
DR. JUSTICE S.K. PANIGRAHI 
Date of Hearing : 16.05.2023        :      Date of Judgment: 21.06.2023 
D.Dash,J.  The Appellant, by filing this Appeal from inside th e jail, has 
assailed the judgment of conviction and order of se ntence dated 
28.05.2016 passed by the learned Additional Session s Judge, 
Nabarangpur in C.T. No.10 of 2016(T) arising out of  G.R. Case No.842 
of 2015 corresponding to Papadahandi P.S. Case No.1 35 of 2015 of the 
Court of the learned Sub-Divisional Judicial Magist rate (S.D.J.M.), 
Nabaranghpur.

{{ 2 }} 
 
Page 2 of 8 
JCRLA No.28 of 2017 
 
  The Appellant (accused) thereunder has been convi cted for 
commission of offence under sections 302 of the Ind ian Penal Code, 
1860 (for short, ‘the IPC’). Accordingly he has bee n sentenced to 
undergo imprisonment for life and pay fine of Rs.10 ,000/- (Rupees Ten 
Thousand) with the default stipulation to undergo r igorous 
imprisonment for one year.   
2. Prosecution case is that on 05.09.2015, the Infor mant-Rama Jani 
(P.W.13) hearing the shout of the mother of the acc used-Sukaldei Jani 
(deceased) went to the house of the accused, who wa s residing nearby. 
Arriving at the house of the accused, Rama (P.W.13)  saw the accused 
slitting the throat of his mother by means of a Katari (knife). At the sight 
of Rama (P.W.13), the accused took to his heels by leaving that Katari 
(knife) at the place. The accused was chased and na bbed by Rama 
(P.W.13) with the assistance of co-villagers, namel y, Somanath Jani 
(P.W.1) and Dhansai Jani (P.W.2). The accused was t hen brought to the 
spot where the deceased was lying dead with profuse  bleeding injuries. 
It is stated that the accused used to quarrel with his mother and assault 
frequently for not meeting his illegal demand of money for consumption 
of liquor. Rama Jani (P.W.13) then lodged a written  report with the 
Inspector-in-Charge (I.I.C.), Papadahandi Police St ation on 05.09.2015. 
The I.I.C. receiving the written report treated the  same as F.I.R. (Ext.7) 
and upon registration the case took up investigatio n. He examined the 
Informant (P.W.13) and other witnesses. He also vis ited the spot. 
Having held inquest over the dead body of the decea sed and preparing 
the report (Ext.3), he sent the dead body for post mortem examination 
by issuing necessary requisition to that effect. Th e wearing apparels of

{{ 3 }} 
 
Page 3 of 8 
JCRLA No.28 of 2017 
 
the deceased were seized after post mortem examinat ion. The nail 
clippings of he accused collected by the Medical Of ficer with his 
wearing clothes were also seized. The statement of P.W.13 on the 
requisition of the Investigating Officer (P.W.16) w as recorded by the 
learned Magistrate under section 161, Cr.P.C.  
  On completion of investigation, Final Form was sub mitted 
placing the accused to face the Trial for commissio n of offence under 
section 302 of the IPC. 
3. Learned S.D.J.M., Nabarangpur, on receipt of the above report, 
took cognizance of the said offence and after obser ving the formalities, 
committed the case to the Court of Sessions for Tri al. That is how the 
Trial commenced by framing the charge for the above  offence against 
this accused.    
4. In the Trial, the prosecution has examined in total  seventeen (17) 
witnesses. Out of them, as already stated, P.W.13  is the Informant and 
his wife is P.W.7. The post occurrence witnesses are P.W.1 to 6 whereas 
P.W.8 to 12 and 15 are the witnesses to the seizure . The F.I.R. (Ext.1) 
lodged by P.W.13, which has been admitted in eviden ce and marked 
Ext.7  being scribed by another, that scribe has co me to the witness box 
as P.W.14. The Medical Officer, who had conducted t he Post Mortem 
Examination over the dead body of the mother of the accused, is P.W.17 
whereas the I.O. is P.W.16. 
 Besides the oral evidence, being piloted through t he above 
witnesses; the prosecution has also proved certain documents, which 
have been admitted in evidence and marked Exts.1 to  12. Importantly, 
out of those are the FIR marked Ext.7 and the inque st as well as Post

{{ 4 }} 
 
Page 4 of 8 
JCRLA No.28 of 2017 
 
Mortem Examination Report, which are Ext.3 and 12 r espectively. The 
Chemical Examiner’s Report has been admitted in evi dence and marked 
Ext.11 whereas the other documents are the seizure list, police 
requisition etc. 
5. The plea of the defence is that of complete denial. In the Trial, the 
accused has not led any evidence in support of his case. 
6. The Trial Court, upon examination of the evidence o f P.W.17, the 
Doctor, who had conducted the autopsy over the dead  body of the 
mother of the deceased and on going through his rep ort (Ext.12) as well 
as  the other evidence on record such as that of P. W.17, the I.O. , who 
had held inquest over the dead body of the deceased  and had noted the 
injuries in the report in his own language as well as the evidence of 
other witnesses has come to the conclusion that the  mother of the 
accused met homicidal death. Having said so, relian ce upon the 
evidence of P.W.7 and P.W.13 which have been corrob orated by the 
other evidences of P.W.1 and 2 has held the accused  guilty for 
commission of offence under section 302 of the I.P.C.  
7. Learned counsel for the Appellant (accused) submit ted that the 
evidence of the prosecution witnesses, who are high ly interested in the 
success of the prosecution ought not to have been a ccepted without 
being put to, strict scrutiny from every possible a ngle and testing the 
same with the other evidence with regard to the mat erial particulars. He 
further submitted that the evidence of P.W.13 and P .W.7 when read as a 
whole do not lead to believe for a moment that they  had seen the 
accused slitting the throat of his mother (deceased ) and therefore, the

{{ 5 }} 
 
Page 5 of 8 
JCRLA No.28 of 2017 
 
evidence coming from the evidence of P.W.1 and 2 ev en when accepted 
do not come to the aid of the prosecution case.  
8. Learned counsel for the Respondent-State submitted that the 
evidence of the prosecution witnesses is quite cons istent with one 
another as to how the incident took place and what role the accused 
played therein. He further submitted that the evidence of the prosecution 
witnesses that no sooner did they arrive in the house of the accused, they 
saw the accused running away leaving that Katari (knife) at the spot near 
the dead body of his mother, who was then lying wit h profuse bleeding 
injury is enough to come to a definite conclusion o n the complicity of 
this accused attributing the authorship of that fatal injury on the throat of 
the deceased.  
 The Doctor, who conducted the autopsy over the dea d body of the 
deceased who happens to be the mother of the accuse d, is P.W.17. He 
has stated to have noticed one lacerated looking in cised wound having 
size 4’’ X 3’’ X bone deep transversely present on anterior neck. The 
trachea, oesophagus, larynx, pharynx, large vein an d arteries of neck, 
muscles of neck reaching upto cervical vertebra wer e cut. He has pin 
pointedly stated that such injuries are possible by  a sharp cutting 
weapon. According to him, the injuries are ante mor tem in nature and it 
was a homicidal death taking place within 12 to 18 hours from his 
examination. He has stated that such injuries which  he noticed were 
sufficient to cause the death of a person. Having e xamined the Katari 
(knife) in course of investigation, he states to ha ve given opinion that 
with such knife, the injuries noticed on the deceas ed were possible. He 
had given his report to that effect which has been admitted in evidence

{{ 6 }} 
 
Page 6 of 8 
JCRLA No.28 of 2017 
 
and marked Ext.9/2. The evidence of this witness ha s not been 
questioned in any manner. 
 Besides the above, we find the evidence of the Inv estigating 
Officer (P.W.17), who too had noted the injuries on  the neck of the 
deceased on the inquest report indicating in his ow n language and that 
has been proved as Ext.3. The evidence of other wit nesses is also stand 
to the effect that they had seen the deceased lying  with profuse bleeding 
injuries on her neck. All these evidence have remai ned unchallenged 
during the Trial and that has also been the situation before us. With such 
overwhelming evidence, we find no difficulty in con curring with the 
finding of the Trial Court that the nature of death  of the deceased 
(mother of the accused)  was homicidal. 
9.  Having said as above, now it stands for being answ ered as to who 
is the author of the crime. The star witness for th e prosecution is 
P.W.13. He is the Informant and has proved the F.I. R. (Ext.7). It is his 
evidence that in the morning hour on that relevant date, he was in his 
house and was preparing to go out for walk when he heard the groaning 
sound of the deceased (mother of the accused). It is stated that he having 
gone to the place saw the accused dealt a forceful blow on the throat of 
the deceased by means of a Katari. He further submi ts that seeing him, 
the accused started running. It is also stated that  receiving the Katari 
blow, the deceased fell down on the ground and he t hen having gone 
near her, found her dead. It is next stated that as the accused ran towards 
the village forest, he having chased, could apprehe nd him at a distance 
and the accused was nabbed with the assistance of P .W.1 and P.W.2. It 
has also been stated by this witness that the weari ng apparels of the

{{ 7 }} 
 
Page 7 of 8 
JCRLA No.28 of 2017 
 
accused were then stained with blood. This P.W.1 ha ving been cross-
examined at length, we find no such discrepancies i n his evidence nor it 
is inconsistent with the evidence of P.W.1 and P.W. 2, who have 
appeared at the scene later and assisted this P.W.1 3 in ultimately 
nabbing the accused, who was being chased by P.W.13 . It is stated by 
P.W.1 that on that day around 8 a.m., he saw the ac cused running at the 
village road and P.W.13 chasing him and, therefore,  he detained the 
accused to enquire the matter. He further stated th at the wearing shirts, 
arms and face of the accused were stained with huma n blood. It is his 
further evidence that he and P.W.13 took the accused to his house where 
he saw the deceased who is the mother of the accuse d lying dead in a 
pool of blood in the kitchen. He has further stated to have seen the throat 
of the deceased to have been slitted by a sharp edg ed weapon and that 
Katari (knife) to have been stained with blood was lying near the dead 
body. P.W.2 also stated in the same vein, which is wholly consistent 
with the evidence of P.W.1 and that also is consist ent with the second 
part of the incident as has been stated by P.W.13. Despite cross-
examination, we find that the evidence of P.W.1 and  P.W.2 have not 
only remained unshaken but no such material has bee n elicited from 
them when there stands no reason to view their test imony with 
suspicion. In addition to the above, it is the stat ement of P.W.1 that the 
accused had in clear terms had confessed before him , P.W.13 and others 
that he had slitted the throat of the deceased and killed her when she 
refused to pay him money for consuming the liquor. Of course, P.W.13 
does not state so. But that has been stated by P.W. 2. Even if we are not 
impressed to accept the evidence of the prosecution  as regards the 
extrajudicial confession said to have been made by him before P,W.1

{{ 8 }} 
 
Page 8 of 8 
JCRLA No.28 of 2017 
 
and P.W.2 and other villagers for the reason that b y then the accused 
had been nabbed and kept under detention as the ocu lar testimony of 
P.W.13 receives full corroboration from the evidenc e of P.W.1 and 2 as 
well as the evidence of the Doctor (P.W.16), in the  absence of any sort 
of explanation coming from the side of the accused,  we are led to hold 
that the prosecution through clear, cogent and acce ptable evidence has 
established the charge against the accused for havi ng intentionally 
caused the death of his mother by slitting her throat by means of a knife. 
Consequently, we held that the accused is liable fo r commission of 
offence under section 302 of the I.P.C..  
10. In the result, the Appeal stands dismissed. The jud gment of 
conviction and order of sentence dated 28 
th  May, 2016 passed by the 
learned Additional Sessions Judge, Nabarangpur in C riminal Trial 
No.10 of 2016 are hereby confirmed .           
  
    
             (D. Dash) 
   Judge. 
 Dr. S.K. Panigrahi       I agree.   
                   
 
                 (Dr.S.K. Panigrahi) 
  Judge. 
 
 
 
 
True Copy 
 
 
Sr.Steno 
 
 
 
Himansu