Page 1 of 7 
 
 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK 
 
W.P.(C) No.16069 of 2023  
 
 
 
    
Subham Kumar Dora  …. Petitioner  
 
 
 
-versus- 
 
State of Odisha and others  …. Opposite Parties  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Learned advocates appeared in this case:  
 
For petitioner  :   Mr. Digambara Mishra, Advocate 
 
 
For opposite parties  :  Ms. Suman Pattanayak, AGA 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                        CORAM: JUSTICE ARINDAM SINHA 
                                                     
 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 Dates of hearing : 18.05.2023, 31.07.2023 and 03.0 8.22023 
 Date of judgment : 03.08.2023 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
 
 
                       
1.   Petitioner’s case is that his grandfather and fath er were both 
issued caste certificates stating they belong to ‘K ondadora’ Scheduled 
Tribe. He has challenged order dated 6 th  May, 2023 passed by the 
Tahsildar, whereby the authority found that he does  not belong to the 
Scheduled Tribe but is of caste ‘Telenga’. The find ing was based on 
the reason reproduced below.

// 2 // 
 
WP(C) 16069 of 2023                Page 2 of 7 
 
   “ On going through the Sabik  R.O.R (1936 
Settlement) under Holding No.18 of Mouza- 
Jammunda, P.S- Tusura, recorded tenants are 
Kunja Bihari Dora, Parakhita Dora, S/o 
Padmanabha Dora, (forefathers of Subham 
Dora) and the caste has been recorded as 
Telenga. The original Sabik Khata No. 18 has 
been corresponding to Hal Khata No.34 and 
Khata No.23, wherein the caste has also been 
recorded as Telenga. It reveals from Bhulekh 
website/ Tahasil record room and District 
record room.” 
2.   On earlier occasion State had contended that origi nal entry in 
Sabik Khata no.18, corresponding to Hal Khata no.34  and Khata no.23 
was made on 15 
th  May, 1935 by the Settlement Officer, Patna State. 
Petitioner’s grandfather was thereby recorded to be long to caste 
‘Telenga’. ‘Dora’ is an honorific title. The grandf ather’s certificate is 
pending verification. Furthermore, the writ petitio n is not maintainable 
on available efficacious alternative statutory remedy of appeal.  
3.   In response, petitioner had drawn attention to ord er dated 21 st  
April, 2003 made by the Tahsildar, acting on petiti on filed by 
petitioner’s grandfather. There was direction in th e order to start a 
Revenue Misc. case for changing caste to ‘Kondodora ’ in place of

// 3 // 
 
WP(C) 16069 of 2023                Page 3 of 7 
 
‘Telenga’ in respect of holding no.23 in village-Ja mmunda. Petitioner 
then demonstrated that present record in respect of  the plot bears caste 
‘Kondadora’. Further submissions were made by Mr. M ishra, learned 
advocate appearing on behalf of petitioner, as were  recorded in 
paragraphs 3 and 4 of order dated 31 st  July, 2023. The paragraphs are 
reproduced below.  
“3.  He submits, his client’s case is not that cast e 
Telenga/Telengana is synonymous as with 
Kondadora. His client’s case is that he belongs to 
Scheduled Tribe ‘Kondadora’. His ancestors 
migrated to places in Western Odisha and in 
keeping with origin of migration, they were called 
and came to be known as, inter alia, Telenga. He 
relies on Note of Clarification on the Ethnic 
Status of the Dora/Konda Dora of Western 
Orissa, annexed at pages 37 and 38 in the writ 
petition. The note carries views of Scheduled 
Castes Scheduled Tribes Research Training 
Institute (SCSTRTI). It is extracted and 
reproduced below.  
“Thus as per our study, the people with 
Dora title ie, the so called “DORA” people of 
our study area ie, Bargarh & Bolangir 
Districts in Western Orissa and in Koraput 
district in Southern Orissa are found to be

// 4 // 
 
WP(C) 16069 of 2023                Page 4 of 7 
 
“Kondadora” (ST) . Regarding the ethnic status 
of the so called “DORA” of other districts 
these findings can not be generalized because 
as clearly indicated above as well as in our 
accompanying ethnic status report, the 
nomenclature “Dora” appears to be broad and 
classificatory because “Dora” is not the name 
of a particular community but an honorific title 
commonly used by a number of communities of 
tribal and non-tribal origin. Among them only 
those who possess the socio-cultural 
characteristic of the Kondadora as 
comparatively analysed in our ethnic status 
report can only be treated as Kondadora (ST).”  
 (emphasis supplied)  
4. He hands up counter filed by State in WP(C) 
no.20909 of 2011 (Motiram Majhi v. State of 
Odisha and others), dismissed by coordinate 
Bench on 16th November, 2021, pursuant to 
counter filed by State. The counter is handed back 
to Mr. Mishra.”  
 
Accordingly, petitioner was given liberty to disclo se the writ petition 
and counter filed by State. They have been disclose d and copies given 
to Ms. Pattanayak, learned advocate, Additional Government Advocate 
appearing on behalf of State.

// 5 // 
 
WP(C) 16069 of 2023                Page 5 of 7 
 
4.   Today Ms. Pattanayak, relies on judgment of the Su preme 
Court in State of Maharashtra vs. Keshao Vishwanath Sonone , 
reported in (2021) 13 SCC 366 , paragraphs 45 to 65. She submits, the 
Supreme Court said, the conclusion is inescapable t hat the High Court 
could not have entertained the claim or looked into the evidence to find 
out  and decide that tribe ‘Gowari’ is part of Sche duled Tribe ‘Gond 
Gowari’, the latter included in the Constitution (S cheduled Tribes) 
Order, 1950. She submits, the declaration of law is  clear that a caste 
cannot be changed or meaning of a caste given as sy nonymous to a 
caste mentioned in the Presidential Order by any au thority, except 
through amendment of the Presidential Order by Act of Parliament.  
5.   Disclosure by petitioner of challenge to the circu lar issued by 
the Government giving clarification regarding fake caste certificate on 
‘Dora’ community based on note carrying view of SCS TRTI was 
challenged before this Court. State filed counter a ffidavit to the writ 
petition, where it defended the circular. The writ petition was 
dismissed as petitioner therein did not prosecute i t. Hence, the 
clarification was not interfered with. Petitioner’s  case is that the 
Revenue Misc case was started pursuant to the clari fication and the

// 6 // 
 
WP(C) 16069 of 2023                Page 6 of 7 
 
revenue record rectified to reflect correct caste o f his grandfather in 
respect of holding no.23 in village-Jammunda.  
6.   The rectification of record resulted to be good pr esumption of 
petitioner’s caste as belonging to Scheduled Tribe ‘Kondadora’. 
Petitioner relies on this presumption to assert tha t he is entitled to 
issuance of the caste certificate. The rectificatio n in the record is 
pursuant to a study made by the institute (SCSTRTI)  and view taken 
thereupon that those people in then Bargarh and Bol angir districts in 
Western Orissa and in Koraput district in Southern Orissa called 
‘Dora’, were found to be ‘Kondadora’. Contention of  State on ‘Dora’ 
being a honorific title appears to be based on this  view. The study 
revealed that because of origin of migration the tr ibal people were 
known as, inter alia, ‘Telenga’. This was a misdesc ription on 
convenience of attaching a name to them. That canno t obliterate their 
identity as belonging to the Scheduled Tribe ‘Konda dora’. Entry in the 
land record is a rebuttable presumption. There is n o rebuttal. 
Presumptions are possible in law as can be relied on to be evidence.  
7.   Petitioner’s case is not based on an interpretatio n of belonging 
to a caste synonymous with one that finds mention i n the Presidential 
Order. Nor is his case that the caste he belongs to, should be one which

// 7 // 
 
WP(C) 16069 of 2023                Page 7 of 7 
 
entitles him to issuance of caste certificate even though the caste is not 
mentioned in the Presidential Order. His case is th at he belongs to the 
Scheduled Tribe ‘Kondadora’. It is a mentioned Sche duled Tribe. 
There was misdescription of his grandfather’s caste  in the record. The 
misdescription has been rectified. The rectificatio n stands and is good 
evidence of his identity.  
8.   Impugned order dated 6 
th  May, 2023 is set aside and quashed  
on being perverse, it not based on relevant evidenc e. As such the writ 
petition is maintainable. The Tahsildar is directed to forthwith issue the 
caste certificate unless the application is to be r ejected on some cogent 
reason, other than those mentioned in impugned order and pendency of 
verification of caste certificate of petitioner’s g randfather or any other 
relative. Either the rejection or issuance of the c aste certificate must be 
done, within six weeks of communication.  
9.   The writ petition is disposed of.  
10.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                         (Arindam Sinha) 
                                        Judge 
 
Prasant