CRLA No.461 of 2020 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK 
CRLA No.461 of 2020  
In the matter of an Appeal under section 374 (2) of  the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 and from the judgment of c onviction and 
order of sentence dated 29.01.2020 passed by the le arned Sessions 
Judge, Gajapati, Paralakhemundi in S.T. No.24 of 2016. 
---- 
Sujeet Sabar …. Appellant 
 
-versus- 
State of Odisha 
…. Respondent 
Appeared in this case by Hybrid Arrangement  
(Virtual/Physical Mode) : 
 For Appellant - Mr.N.R.Mohanty, 
     (Advocate) 
 For Respondent  -  Mr.Sitikant Mishra, 
     Addl. Standing Counsel  
CORAM: 
MR. JUSTICE D.DASH 
DR. JUSTICE S.K.PANIGRAHI 
Date of Hearing :19.05.2023        :        Date of  Judgment:21.06.2023 
    
D.Dash,J.  The Appellant, by filing this Appeal, has assailed the judgment of 
conviction and the order of sentence dated 29.01.20 20 passed by the 
learned Sessions Judge, Gajapati, Paralakhemundi in S.T. No.24 of 2016 
arising out of G.R. Case No.518 of 2015 correspondi ng to Serango P.S. 
Case No.59 of 2015 of the Court of learned Sub-Divi sional Judicial 
Magistrate (SDJM), Paralakhemundi. 
  The Appellant (accused) has been convicted for co mmission of 
offence under section 452/302 of the Indian Penal C ode, 1860 (in short,

{{ 2 }} 
 
CRLA No.461 of 2020 
 
‘IPC’) and he has been sentenced to undergo impriso nment for life for 
the offence under section 302 of the IPC and rigoro us imprisonment for 
5 years and fine of Rs.5000/- (Rupees Five Thousand ) in default to 
suffer rigorous imprisonment for six (6) months for  the offence under 
section 452 of the IPC with the stipulation that th e substantive sentences 
would run concurrently. 
2.  Prosecution case is that on 18.11.2015 at about 8.3 0 a.m., the 
accused entered into the 3
rd  standard class room of Dangosingh Ashram 
School at village Dangosingh under Seranga Police Station in the district 
of Gajapati. It is stated that the accused then ass aulted a girl student, 
who was reading in that class-III by giving kicks a nd fist blows. When 
other students of the said class raised hullah, the  teachers of the school 
as well as the Head Mistress went to the said class  room and found that 
girl student aged about 9 years lying in a serious condition. 
The Head Mistress namely, Smt.Jamuna Devi (P.W.1) t hen 
presented the written report with the Inspector-in- Charge (IIC) of 
Seranga Police Station, who treating the same as Fi rst Information 
Report (F.I.R.), immediately registered the case an d directed the 
Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police (ASI) attached to  the said Police 
Station (P.W.15) to take up the investigation. 
3.  In course of investigation, said Investigating Offi cer (I.O- 
P.W.15) examined the informant (P.W.1) and he then received the 
opinion that the injured student was admitted to Gu mma Community 
Health Centre (CHC). So he went there and issued requisition vide Ext.8 
for submission of the injury report.  The I.O (P.W. 15) then visited the 
spot, prepared the spot map (Ext.9) and examined ot her witnesses. The 
accused was then arrested and forwarded in custody to Court.

{{ 3 }} 
 
CRLA No.461 of 2020 
 
 On that day, in the evening around 5.45 pm, the I. O (P.W.15) 
received a message from Managalabag Police Station, Cuttack regarding 
the death of injured student in course of her treat ment in the SCB 
Medical College and Hospital, Cuttack. The case the n having turned to 
one under section 302 of the IPC, the IIC (P.W.18) took charge of the 
investigation and investigated into the case. That second I.O. then re-
examined the Informant (P.W.2) and other witnesses,  she obtained the 
inquest and Post Mortem Examination Report of the d eceased from 
Cuttack and seized those. On completion of the inve stigation, that 
second I.O (P.W.18) submitted the Final Form placin g the accused to 
face the Trial for commission of offence under sect ion 452/302 of the 
IPC. 
4.  Learned SDJM, Paralakhemundi, receiving the Final F orm as 
above, took cognizance of the offence and after obs erving the 
formalities committed the case to the Court of Sess ions. That is how the 
Trial commenced by framing charge against the said offence against the 
accused. 
5.  In the Trial, the prosecution in total has examined  twenty (20) 
witnesses. As already stated P.W.1, is the Head Mis tress of the Ashram 
School, who had lodged the FIR and proved the same as Ext.1. P.W.2, 
P.W.3 and P.W.11 are the Teachers of the said schoo l whereas P.W.4 is 
the peon attached to the school.  A student of clas s-IX has been 
examined as P.W.5. The father of the deceased girl student has come to 
the witness box as P.W.6.  The Doctor, who had conducted Post Mortem 
Examination over the dead body of the deceased, has  been examined as 
P.W.14, whereas the first I.O is P.W.15. P.W.18 is the second I.O., who 
completed the investigation and submitted the Final Form.

{{ 4 }} 
 
CRLA No.461 of 2020 
 
6.  The plea of the defence is that of complete denial and false 
implication. The accused has examined two witnesses  i.e. D.W.1 and 
D.W.2. This D.W.1 is the mother of the accused wher eas D.W.2 is the 
Medical Officer of Gumma CHC, who had initially exa mined the 
injured student being taken by the Head Mistress (I nformant-P.W.1). 
The Trial Court having examined the evidence of P.W .14 who being the 
Associate Professor in the Department of F & T of S CB Medical 
College and Hospital at Cuttack had conducted the P ost Mortem 
Examination over the dead body of the deceased aged  around 9 years 
and his report (Ext.7) as well as the evidence of o ther witnesses 
including the A.S.I. of Police Officer (P.W.19), wh o had held inquest 
over the dead body of the deceased and submitted his report (Ext.11) has 
arrived at a conclusion that the death of the decea sed was a homicidal in 
nature. In fact this aspect of the case was not und er the challenge before 
the Trial Court that is also the situation before us. 
The Assistant Professor (P.W.14) during post mortem  
examination had noticed the following external injuries. 
“a. Abrasion with red brown scab on the back of rig ht 
shoulder measures 6cm x 3 cm.; 
b. Abraded contusion of size 6cm x 3.5 cm, reddish brown in 
colour was noticed on the right side of face just l ateral to 
orbit and malar prominence.; 
c. Abraded contusion which was reddish brown in col our and 
of size 6 cm x 2 cm was noticed below that left eye.; and 
d. Abrasion with brownish scab and peripheral shedd ing was 
noticed on the right knee, 1 cm x 1 cm in size.” 
On dissection, she had found the scalp to be contus ed at left 
fronto temporal area and so also the temporalis muscles was contused by 
lateral. She had noticed subdural hemorrhage on rig ht hemisphere and

{{ 5 }} 
 
CRLA No.461 of 2020 
 
diffuse sub arachnoid hemorrhage on both the hemisp here. Punctate 
intra cerebral hemorrhage had also been noticed by P.W.14 in the white 
matter of both frontal regions. The lateral ventric les were containing 
fluid blood. P.W.14 has deposed to have noticed a c entrally placed 
pocket of clotted hematoma in the cerebellum with p unctate brain stem 
hemorrhage in mid brain and pons. It is her evidenc e that all these 
injuries are ante mortem and could have been caused  by hard and blunt 
trauma. The opinion of P.W.14 is that the death cou ld have been due to 
cranio cerebral injuries and complications thereof.  P.W.14 has noted all 
these features during all those external and intern al features noticed on 
the dead body of the deceased girl student aged abo ut 9 years in her 
report (Ext.7). In addition to the above, the witne sses have also stated 
that the deceased student having received the injur ies caused by the 
accused became unconscious and there was bleeding t oo. It is also the 
evidence that the deceased after receiving the inju ries in the class room 
was taken to nearest hospital and then ultimately h ad been received at 
S.C.B.  Medical College and Hospital at Cuttack whe re she succumbed 
to the said injuries on the next day of the inciden t. All these evidence as 
discussed above have not been shaken in any manner.  Therefore, we are 
of the view that the death of the deceased girl stu dent of the age of 9 
years was homicidal in nature. 
7.  Learned counsel for the Appellant (accused) submitt ed that the 
prosecution evidence placed through the witnesses P .W.1, P.W.4 and 
P.W.5 having not been critically analyzed the concl usion of the Trial 
Court that it is the accused for whose assault, the deceased met her death 
cannot be sustained. He further submitted that ther e is no acceptable 
direct evidence that is the accused had assaulted t he deceased while she 
was in the class room. He submitted that when the c lassmates of the

{{ 6 }} 
 
CRLA No.461 of 2020 
 
deceased have not whispered anything implicating th e accused and 
when the another classmate of the deceased (P.W.20)  has expressed her 
ignorance as to how the deceased died with further evidence on record 
coming from the lips of D.W.1 that he had noticed n o such external 
injuries on the body of the deceased, the finding o f guilt against the 
accused as has been returned by the Trial Court is liable to be set aside. 
8.  Learned counsel for the State-Respondent submitted that when the 
consistent evidence of the prosecution witnesses st and that the accused 
having entered into the class room, assaulted the d eceased who was a 
handicapped girl and in consequence thereof as the evidence reveal that 
the death has taken place, the Trial Court did comm it no mistake in 
holding the accused guilty for commission of offenc e under section 
452/302 of the IPC. 
9.  Keeping in view the submissions made, we have caref ully read 
the judgment of conviction impugned in this Appeal. We have also gone 
through the depositions of all the witnesses P.W.1 to P.W.20 and two 
D.Ws (D.W.1 & D.W.2). We have also perused the docu ments which 
have been admitted in evidence and marked Ext.1 to Ext.12/1.  
10.  In order to address the rival submission and find o ut the 
complicity of the accused in assaulting the girl st udent of the age of 9 
years when she was in the classroom of the school w hich has finally led 
to her death, we are called upon to undertake the e xercise of scrutiny of 
the evidence on record. 
Admittedly, P.W.1 was the Head Mistress of the scho ol at the 
relevant time and then the deceased was reading in class-III of the said 
school. P.W.1 states that on that day hearing shout  of the students, she 
went to the said place, she saw the accused running  away from the

{{ 7 }} 
 
CRLA No.461 of 2020 
 
school premises. It is her evidence that the studen ts then informed that 
the accused having come there had assaulted the dec eased. She then 
states to have seen the deceased lying unconscious on the ground with 
bleeding injury on her head. It is stated by her th at immediately after 
that the deceased was shifted to CHC, Gumma and the  matter was 
informed to the Police Officer at Gumma Police Out Post. She, during 
cross-examination, has stated that at the relevant time, no teacher had 
been allotted to take up the period of class-III. P .W.2, the another 
teacher of the school has also stated that hearing the shout of the 
students, while going towards the room of class-III , she found the 
deceased lying on the ground with blood oozing out of her ear. Her 
evidence is that the injured student was unconsciou s. Although it has 
been stated by this witness P.W.2 that the students  informed about the 
incident that accused assaulted the deceased, she having not been able to 
name those students in our considered view not that  a deficiency to 
discard their evidence that being the teachers of t he school having heard 
the shouts of the students had come to the room and  saw the accused 
running away. Another teacher of the school has als o stated in the same 
vein that when she was taking the class in class-V,  having heard the 
shout, she had come to the place and saw the deceas ed lying 
unconscious with blood oozing out of her ear and th en she was lying on 
the ground. She has further stated to have ascertai ned the fact from 
students that the accused came to the school and ha d assaulted the 
deceased.  
The star witness for the prosecution is P.W.4 who i s the peon of 
the school. He has stated that it was around 8.30 am, the accused entered 
the school premises and having gone to the room whe re class-III 
students were sitting, he assaulted the deceased by  giving fist and kicks.

{{ 8 }} 
 
CRLA No.461 of 2020 
 
He has further stated that during such assault, dec eased received 
bleeding injuries and came to lie on the ground in an unconscious state. 
He has specifically stated that when he rushed to t he room, the accused 
seeing him and others ran away. He has clearly stated that by the time he 
arrived; other students were also present in the cl ass room. P.W.5, who 
is a student of class-IX has stated to have seen the accused running away 
from the spot where the deceased was lying unconsci ous. He has denied 
the suggestion to have been stating falsehood. The time gap between the 
entry and exit of the accused as stated by this wit ness is too short. The 
accused was not unknown to these witnesses. It is n o doubt true that 
some students who have been examined from the side of the prosecution 
i.e. P.W.7 as also P.W.20 have not implicated the a ccused but for that 
reason, the evidence of the prosecution witnesses a s obtained and 
already discussed to the effect that they had seen the accused running 
away from the class room and then immediately they noticed the 
deceased lying unconscious on ground with bleeding from her ear 
cannot be disbelieved. The evidence of the above wi tnesses examined 
from the side of the prosecution thus reveal that t he accused at the 
relevant time had entered into the school premises and gone to that room 
where deceased was very much present and shortly th ereafter he when 
the above noted witnesses were approaching the room  hearing the shout 
of the students, the accused was found running away  and that 
immediately they then had seen the deceased lying u nconscious on the 
ground with bleeding from her ear and some blood wa s also there on the 
floor are acceptable. 
The accused with such proven circumstance has not p rovided any 
explanation as to why he had at all been to the sch ool and entered into 
the room in question. It is rather seen that the ac cused when in his

{{ 9 }} 
 
CRLA No.461 of 2020 
 
statement recorded under 313 of the Cr.P.C. has not  provided any such 
explanation, his mother has come to depose that the  accused was 
undergoing treatment for unsoundness on his mind. S he has further 
stated that at the time when the incident took plac e in the school, the 
accused was residing with her and was under treatme nt. Such evidence 
let in by the prosecution is totally without any co rroboration and not 
deriving support from any documents or proved incid ent/s which had 
happened before.  
11.  On a conspectus of discussion of evidence as herein above, we are 
thus of the view that the finding of guilt recorded  by the Trial Court 
against the accused for commission of the offence under section 452/302 
of the IPC Act is well in order and the accused has  rightly been 
convicted for the offence under section 452/302 of the IPC and 
sentenced thereunder. 
12.  In the result, the Appeal stands dismissed. The jud gment of 
conviction and order of sentence dated 29.01.2020 passed by the learned 
Sessions Judge, Gajapati, Paralakhemundi in S.T. No .24 of 2016 are 
hereby confirmed.  
            (D. Dash), 
              Judge. 
      Dr.S.K. Panigrahi, J. I Agree. 
     
                (Dr.S.K.Panigrahi), 
             Judge.  
 
 
 
 
 
Gitanjali